The case originated in an application (no. 72608/14) against Romania lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Romanian national, Mr Gabi-Ainăld Mihăilescu (“the applicant”), on 2 October 2014.
The Romanian Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Ms C. Brumar, from the Ministry of Foreign Affairs.
On 13 October 2015 notice of the application was given to the Government.
The Government objected to the examination of the application by a Committee. After having considered the Government’s objection, the Court rejects it.
The applicant was born in 1971.
In 2012 the Bacău County Court convicted the applicant of human trafficking and sentenced him to ten years’ imprisonment.
The applicant was released in November 2018 after he had served the prison sentence in Iaşi, Bacău and Vaslui Prison. He had transited through several other prisons in order to take part in judicial proceedings and for medical reasons.
The applicant was held in a transit cell at Jilava Prison between 6 and 9 June 2014 and between 15 and 17 July 2014.
The applicant complained that he had been held in a small, unventilated, smoking cell.
The Government submitted that the applicant had been held in a cell measuring up to 27.24 square meters, where smoking had been allowed. The cell had been fitted with eighteen beds but had been permanently occupied by four to sixteen detainees.
The applicant was held in a transit cell at Tulcea Prison between 10 and 26 June 2014 and between 17 and 21 July 2014.
The applicant complained that he had been held in a small, unventilated, smoking cell with ten other detainees, in conditions of poor hygiene, while being forced to sleep on old and rotten mattresses.
He had lodged several complaints with the post-sentencing judge on the basis of Law no. 254/2013 on the execution of sentences, alleging that at Tulcea Prison he had been held in a cell in poor sanitary condition on the third floor, despite his permanent disability. He also added that he had not received food suited to his medical needs.
All his complaints had been dismissed by the post-sentencing judge as being out of time.
The Government submitted that the applicant had been held in two different cells measuring up to 25.39 square meters, where smoking had been allowed. The cells had been fitted with fifteen beds but had been permanently occupied by ten detainees.
Concerning the food the applicant had received, the standard established by an Order of the Ministry of Justice (OMJ) had been respected, with the detainees having been given a diversified menu. Moreover, the sanitation of the rooms had been taken care of, either periodically or at the inmates’ request.
On 22 July 2014 the applicant was transferred to Vaslui Prison.
The applicant had filed several complaints with the post-sentencing judge attached to Vaslui Prison complaining about the conditions of detention and that he had not been entitled to a personal assistant.
His first complaint had been dismissed as unsubstantiated. In relation to the right to a personal assistant, the applicant’s complaint had been upheld by a decision of Vaslui County Court of 22 April 2015 and Vaslui Prison had been compelled to assign an inmate to provide the applicant with assistance. Nonetheless, as the court had limited territorial competence, such a measure could only be taken for the territory falling within its jurisdiction.
The Government submitted that between 22 July and 18 September 2014, the applicant had been held in a cell where smoking had been allowed, which had been fitted with ten beds and which had been occupied by inmates suffering from chronic diseases.
On 18 September 2014 the applicant had been transferred to another cell fitted with four beds because he had not got along with the other detainees. In that cell the inmates had constantly had cold running water available to them and hot water had been available twice a week, which had been sufficient for their sanitary needs. Furthermore, all furniture had been new, including the mattresses and bed accessories. The applicant had received food in accordance with his dietary requirements.
The Government also noted that the applicant had been held in cells where he had had over 3 square meters of personal space; the sole exception was the period between 12 June and 29 July 2015, when the cell where he had been held had afforded him only 2.2 square meters of personal space.
As regards his complaints concerning passive smoking, the Government indicated that according to documents that had been submitted by the National Prison Administration (Administrația Națională a Penitenciarelor – “ANP”), the applicant had declared himself to be either a smoker or a non-smoker, depending on the type of cell in which he had been placed. He had not complained to the prison staff of any potential for passive smoking and had even bought cigarettes from the prison store. Nonetheless, in October 2015, once he had been moved to a cell where smoking was forbidden, he had ceased buying tobacco products.
The applicant was held in a transit cell at Bacău Prison from 24 to 26 September 2014.
The applicant claimed to have been held in an overly crowded cell without adequate sanitary facilities.
He had lodged a complaint with the post-sentencing judge attached to Bacău Prison, protesting about the conditions in which he had been detained. His complaint had been rejected by the judge as unsubstantiated.
The Government submitted that the material conditions of the applicant’s detention in Bacău Prison were the same as those described in the application no. 46546/12 which had been lodged by the applicant (see Mihăilescu v. Romania, no. 46546/12, §§ 13-21, 1 July 2014).
On 29 October 2013 a medical commission, set up under Law no. 448/2006 regarding the protection and the promotion of the rights of disabled persons, issued a certificate attesting that the applicant had been classified as a person with a permanent severe physical disability on account of his severe visual impairment. The medical panel which had examined the applicant had granted him the right to have a personal care assistant.
The applicant submitted that while in transit in Slobozia, Jilava and Iaşi Prisons he had had no personal assistant. He claimed that he had been dependent on other inmates for assistance with his daily activities, often suffering from degrading and dehumanising treatment.
The applicant had lodged a complaint with the post-sentencing judge attached to Jilava Prison, protesting that he had not had the help of a personal assistant, that he had been forced to share an overcrowded cell with smokers and that the conditions in which he had been transported had been inadequate.
His complaint had been dismissed as unsubstantiated, the judge having considered that the short period of time that he had spent at Jilava Prison had not been long enough to justify his claims of mistreatment.
The Government admitted that in June and July 2014, while the applicant had been held in transit in Slobozia and Jilava Prisons for periods of time lasting between two and four days on each occasion, he had had no personal assistant, as another inmate (who had been appointed to assist the applicant) could not be transferred with him.
Concerning Iaşi Prison, the Government submitted that the applicant had not been held in transit but he had served there a part of the sentence which had been covered by the judgment given in application no. 11220/14 (see Mihăilescu v. Romania, no. 11220/14, 14 February 2017).
The applicant claimed that the conditions of his transportation between prison facilities had been inhuman and degrading. The vans had been severely overcrowded and without ventilation. Moreover, some of the detainees had smoked in the vans.
He had lodged a complaint with the post-sentencing judge. The judge had rejected his claim as unsubstantiated, arguing that the applicant had not submitted a medical certificate to support his claim.
The Government noted that the vehicles used for transport had supported the number of detainees without exceeding their capacity, and had had proper ventilation and anatomical chairs. Additionally, smoking had been forbidden in the vans.
Relevant excerpts from Law no. 254/2013 on the rights of detainees and Ministry of Justice Order no. 433/2010 on mandatory rules for serving of prison sentences are set out in Rezmiveș and Others v. Romania, (nos. 61467/12 and 3 others, §§ 27 and 34, 25 April 2017).