The case originated in two applications (nos. 41903/10 and 41911/10) against the Republic of Cyprus lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by A.H. and J.K. (“the applicants”), on 14 June 2010.
The applicants who had been granted legal aid, were represented by Ms N. Charalambidou, a lawyer practising in Nicosia. The Cypriot Government (“the Government”) were initially represented by their Agent Mr P. Clerides, Attorney-General of the Republic of Cyprus, and subsequently by Mr C. Clerides, his successor.
The applicants alleged that their deportation to Syria would entail the risk of them being subjected to treatment in breach of Article 3 of the Convention. In this respect they also complained of the lack of a remedy satisfying the requirements of Article 13 of the Convention. Further, the applicants complained under Article 5 §§ 1 (f), 2 and 4 of the Convention about their detention by the Cypriot authorities. Lastly, they claimed that their deportation would be in breach of Article 4 of Protocol No. 4.
On 14 June 2010 the President of the First Section decided to apply Rule 39 of the Rules of Court, indicating to the respondent Government that the applicants should not be deported to Syria. The applications were granted priority on the same date (Rule 41). On 21 September 2010 the President of the First Section, following an examination of all the information received from the parties, decided to maintain the interim measure (see paragraph 46 below).
On 19 January 2011 the applications were communicated to the Government. It was also decided to rule on the admissibility and merits of the applications at the same time (Article 29 § 1).
On 25 August 2011 the Court changed the composition of its Sections (Rule 25 § 1 of the Rules of Court) and the present applications were assigned to the newly composed Fourth Section.
On 30 November 2012 the President of the Section decided on her own motion to grant the applicants anonymity (Rule 47 § 3 of the Rules of Court).
On 19 February 2014 the President of the Section decided under Rule 54 § 2 (c) of the Rules of Court, that the parties should be invited to submit further written observations on the admissibility and merits of the applications in particular concerning the applicants’ complaint under Article 5 § 1 (f) of the Convention as well as concerning new complaints raised in their observations and correspondence under Article 5 § 1 (f) and 4 of the Convention following new developments in their cases. The applicants submitted claims under Article 41 of the Convention concerning these additional observations.
On 23 October 2014 the President of the Section decided, under Rule 54 § 2 (a) of the Rules of Court, to request the applicants to inform the Court, whether, following amendments in the domestic law, they had applied anew for asylum or for a re-opening of their asylum applications in view of the current situation in Syria.
The applicants, A.H. (“the first applicant”) and J.K. (“the second applicant”), who are wife and husband, are Syrian nationals of Kurdish origin and were born in Syria in 1985 and 1979 respectively. They live in Paphos.
The second applicant left Syria on 25 August 2004 and entered Cyprus illegally on 9 September 2004 after travelling from Turkey.
He applied for asylum the next day.
The first applicant left Syria at a later date in order to join the second applicant in Cyprus as they had been engaged to be married. She entered Cyprus illegally on 29 November 2007 after travelling from Turkey.
The applicants married in Cyprus on 4 December 2007 and the first applicant applied for asylum on 6 February 2008.
The applicants’ asylum applications were examined jointly by the Asylum Service.
The Asylum Service held an interview with the applicants on 3 March 2009.
Their applications were dismissed on 26 March 2009 on the ground that they did not fulfil the requirements of the Refugee Law of 2000-2007 (as amended up to 2007), in that they had not shown that they had a well-founded fear of persecution for reasons of race, religion, nationality, membership of a particular group or political opinion or a well-founded fear of serious and unjustified harm for other reasons. The Asylum Service noted that there had been contradictions in the account of facts given by the second applicant with regard to his participation in a demonstration concerning the Qamishli events which raised doubts as to his credibility. Furthermore, it considered that there was no possibility of the second applicant being subjected to inhuman or degrading treatment if returned to Syria. Consequently, it held that the asylum applications had not been substantiated.
On 24 April 2009 the applicants lodged an appeal with the Reviewing Authority against the Asylum Service’s decision.
On 26 March 2010 the Asylum Service’s decision was upheld and the appeal dismissed.
The Reviewing Authority underlined the contradictions and inconsistencies in the second applicant’s claims. It pointed out that he had not given the same reasons for leaving Syria in his written application and in his interview. In the former he had stated that he had come to Cyprus to find work whereas in his interview he claimed that he had left Syria because he feared arrest following his participation in a demonstration. Further, the Reviewing Authority gave weight to the fact that the second applicant had stated that following the demonstration he had allegedly participated in, nothing had actually happened to him and that he had not been sought by the authorities. In his asylum application he had stated that he had not been arrested, detained, harassed, persecuted or wanted by the Syrian authorities. He had also been able to leave Syria legally. The second applicant’s claims were therefore unsubstantiated. No issue arose in respect of the first applicant as she had stated that she had left Syria in order to join the second applicant and marry him and had admitted that she did not face any problems in Syria.
The Reviewing Authority concluded by observing that the applicants had not established that they were at risk of persecution if they returned to Syria. Nor did they satisfy the conditions for temporary residence on humanitarian grounds.
On 15 May 2010 the second applicant brought a “recourse” (judicial review proceedings) before the Supreme Court (first-instance revisional jurisdiction) under Article 146 of the Constitution challenging the decision of the Reviewing Authority. A subsequent application to amend the recourse by adding the first applicant as a complainant was withdrawn as the time-limit of seventy-five days had in the meantime expired (see paragraph 89 below).
On 14 June 2010 the applicants filed the present applications with the Court. The second applicant, in his application form stated that on 13 March 2004 he had taken part in a demonstration in his village in Derit. The purpose of the demonstration was to go to Qamishli to show solidarity with the Kurdish demonstrators following the events of 12 March 2004. Following the intervention of the authorities this had not been possible. The second applicant stated that the police had attacked the demonstrators killing two persons. After going into hiding for a month in a neighbouring village, the second applicant was arrested in Qamishli. He was detained for fourteen days and subjected to torture. He was subsequently transferred to the central prison of Damascus where he was detained for two and a half months. After bribing the authorities he was released on the condition that he would present himself to the authorities in Damascus every fifteen days. He did not do so, however, out of fear to be detained and tortured again.
On 8 October 2013 the Supreme Court dismissed the second applicant’s recourse. It upheld the Reviewing Authority’s decision of 26 March 2010 after examining all the grounds of annulment put forward by the second applicant. The court noted, inter alia, that the main ground for which the second applicant’s asylum claim had not been accepted was the lack of plausibility of his principal allegations and the existence of significant contradictions and omissions which had undermined his credibility. The second applicant had not substantiated that he was at risk of persecution if returned to Syria because he had allegedly participated in a demonstration. Furthermore, the fact that the second applicant was of Kurdish origin was not sufficient in itself to justify the granting of refugee status. The Supreme Court also held that new grounds and allegations concerning his detention, arrest and ill-treatment following the events could not be taken into account. Its jurisdiction under Article 146 of the Constitution was limited to reviewing his claim as it had been made before the Asylum Service and the Reviewing Authority (see paragraph 89 below). Grounds for annulment that had not been put before the Reviewing Authority could not be examined for the first time by the court.
No appeal was lodged against the first instance judgment.
In the meantime, on 17 May 2010 the Yekiti Party and other Kurds from Syria organised a demonstration in Nicosia, near the Representation of the European Commission, the Ministry of Labour and Social Insurance and the Government Printing Office. They were protesting against the restrictive policies of the Cypriot Asylum Service in granting international protection. About 150 Kurds from Syria, including the applicants, remained in the area around the clock, having set up about eighty tents on the pavement. According to the Government, the encampment conditions were unsanitary and protesters were obstructing road and pedestrian traffic. The encampment had become a hazard to public health and created a public nuisance. The protesters performed their daily chores on the pavement, including cooking and washing in unsanitary conditions. The sewage pits had overflown, causing a nuisance and offensive odours. The public lavatories were dirty and the rubbish bins of the Government buildings were being used and, as a result, were continuously overflowing. Furthermore, the protesters were unlawfully obtaining electricity from the Printing Office. Members of the public who lived or worked in the area had complained to the authorities. The Government submitted that efforts had been made by the authorities to persuade the protesters to leave, but to no avail. As a result, the authorities had decided to take action to remove the protesters from the area.
On 28 May 2010 instructions were given by the Minister of the Interior to proceed with the deportation of Syrian-Kurdish failed asylum seekers in the normal way.
On 31 May 2010 the Minister requested the Chief of Police, among others, to take action in order to implement his instructions. Further, he endorsed suggestions made by the competent authorities that deportation and detention orders be issued against Syrian-Kurdish failed asylum seekers who had passports and did not have Ajanib or Maktoumeen status and that the police execute the orders starting with the ones issued against the leaders of the protesters. The police were also directed to take into account the policy guidelines and to use discreet methods of arrest.
According to the Government, letters were sent by the Civil Registry and Migration Department to a number of failed Syrian-Kurdish asylum-seekers informing them that they had to make arrangements to leave Cyprus in view of their asylum applications being turned down (see M.A. v. Cyprus, no. 41872/10, § 32, ECHR 2013 (extracts)). They submitted a copy of such a letter which was dated 1 June 2010 and addressed to the applicants.
From documents submitted by the Government it appears that from 31 May until 7 June 2010 the authorities kept the area under surveillance and kept a record of the protesters’ daily activities and of all comings and goings. In the relevant records it is noted that invariably, between 1.30 a.m. and 5.30 a.m., things were, in general, quiet, and everyone was sleeping apart from those keeping guard. During the above-mentioned period a large-scale operation was organised by the Police Emergency Response Unit, “ERU” (“ΜΜΑΔ”), and a number of other authorities, including the Police Aliens and Immigration Unit, for the removal of the protesters and their transfer to the ERU headquarters for the purpose of ascertaining their status on a case-by-case basis.
In the meantime, between 28 May 2010 and 2 June 2010 orders for the detention and deportation of forty-five failed asylum seekers were issued following background checks. Letters were sent by the District Aliens and Immigration Branch of the Nicosia Police to the Director of the Aliens and Immigration Service and the Ministry of Justice and Public Order, containing a short paragraph with information as to the immigration status of each person. This information included the date of rejection of the asylum application or the closure of the asylum file by the Asylum Service, the date of dismissal of the appeal by the Reviewing Authority, where lodged, and the date some of those concerned had been included on the authorities’ “stop list” (a register of individuals whose entry into and exit from Cyprus is banned or subject to monitoring). The letters recommended the issuance of deportation and detention orders. The Government submitted copies of two such letters with information concerning thirteen people.
On 2 June 2010, letters were also prepared in English by the Civil Registry and Migration Department informing those concerned of the decision to detain and deport them. The Government submitted that, at the time, the authorities did not know whether those individuals were among the protesters.
The removal operation was carried out on 11 June 2010, between approximately 3 a.m. and 5 a.m. with the participation of about 250 officers from the Police Aliens and Immigration Unit, the ERU, the Nicosia District Police Division, the Traffic Division, the Fire Service and the Office for Combating Discrimination of the Cyprus Police Headquarters. The protesters, including the applicants, were led to buses, apparently without any reaction or resistance on their part. At 3.22 a.m. the mini buses carrying the male protesters left. The women, children and babies followed at 3.35 a.m. A total of 149 people were located at the place of protest and were transferred to the ERU headquarters: eighty-seven men, twenty-two women and forty children. Upon arrival, registration took place and the status of each person was examined using computers which had been specially installed the day before. The Government submitted that during this period the protesters had not been handcuffed or put in cells but had been assembled in rooms and given food and drink. It appears from the documents submitted by the Government that by 6.40 a.m. the identification of approximately half of the group had been completed and that the whole operation had ended by 4.30 p.m.
It was ascertained that seventy-six of the adults, along with their thirty children, were in the Republic unlawfully. Their asylum applications had either been dismissed or their files closed for failure to attend interviews. Those who had appealed to the Reviewing Authority had had their appeals dismissed. Some final decisions dated back to 2006. A number of people had also been included on the authorities’ “stop list”. Deportation orders had already been issued for twenty-three of them (see paragraph 31 above).
The authorities deported twenty-two people on the same day at around 6.30 p.m. (nineteen adults and three children). Forty-four people (forty-two men and two women), including the applicants, were arrested. The persons against whom deportation and detention orders had been issued on 2 June 2010 were detained under these orders. The remaining persons, including the applicants, were charged with the criminal offence of unlawful stay in the Republic under section 19(2) of the Aliens and Immigration Law (see paragraph 86 below). They were all arrested and transferred to various detention centres in Cyprus. The applicants were placed in the immigration detention facilities in the Nicosia Central Prisons (Blocks 9 and 10 respectively). Further, on humanitarian grounds, thirteen women whose husbands were detained pending deportation and who had a total of twenty-seven children between them were not arrested themselves.
According to the Government the applicants and their co-detainees were informed orally that they had been arrested and detained on the basis that they had been staying in the Republic unlawfully and were thus “prohibited immigrants” (see paragraph 84 below). They were also informed of their rights pursuant to the Rights of Persons Arrested and Detained Law 2005 (Law 163(I)/2005) (see paragraph 113 below) and, in particular, of their right to contact by phone, in person and in private, a lawyer of their own choice. The applicants submitted that they had not been informed of the reasons for their arrest and detention on that date.
On the same day letters were sent by the District Aliens and Immigration Branch of the Nicosia Police to the Director of the Aliens and Immigration Service and the Ministry of Justice and Public Order, recommending the issuance of deportation and detention orders. The letters contained a short paragraph in respect of each person with information as to his or her immigration status. This included the date of rejection of the asylum application or the closure of the asylum file by the Asylum Service and the date of dismissal of the appeal by the Reviewing Authority where lodged. Some letters also referred to the date the asylum application had been lodged and the date some of the individuals concerned had been included on the authorities’ “stop list”. The Government submitted copies of letters concerning thirty-seven people (most of these letters referred to groups of people).
Deportation and detention orders were also issued in Greek on the same day in respect of the remaining fifty-three people detained (see paragraph 34 above), including the applicants, pursuant to section 14 (6) of the Aliens and Immigration Law on the ground that they were “prohibited immigrants” within the meaning of section 6(1)(k) of that Law. These were couched in identical terms. In respect of two people the orders also mentioned sections 6(1)(i) and 6(1)(l) of the Law.
Subsequently, on the same date, letters were prepared in English by the Civil Registry and Migration Department informing all the detainees individually, including the applicants, of the decision to detain and deport them. The Government submitted thirty-seven copies of these letters, including those addressed to the applicants, the text of which was virtually identical, a standard template having been used.
The text of the letter reads as follows:
“You are hereby informed that you are an illegal immigrant by virtue of paragraph (k). section 1, Article 6 of the Aliens and Immigration law, Chapter 105, as amended until 2009, because you of illegal entry [sic]
Consequently your temporary residence permit/migration permit has been revoked and I have proceeded with the issue of deportation orders and detention orders dated 11th June 2010 against you.
You have the right to be represented before me, or before any other Authority of the Republic and express possible objections against your deportation and seek the services of an interpreter.”
The only differences was that some letters referred to illegal stay rather than illegal entry and that the letters issued earlier referred to 2 June 2010 as the date of issuance of the deportation and detention orders (see paragraph 32 above).
On the copy of the letters to the applicants provided by the Government, there is a handwritten signed note by a police officer stating that the letters were served on the applicants on 18 June 2010 but that they refused to receive and sign for them. The other letters had a similar note or stamp on them with the same date, stating that the person concerned had refused to sign for and/or receive the letter. In a letter dated 7 September 2010 the Government stated that the applicants had been served on 18 June 2010. In their subsequent observations the Government submitted, however, that this was the second attempt to serve the letters, the first attempt having been made on 11 June 2010, that is, the day of the arrest.
The applicants submitted that they had never refused to receive any kind of information in writing. They claimed that it had only been on 14 June 2010 that they had been informed orally that they would be deported to Syria on the same day but that the deportation and detention orders were not served on them on that date or subsequently. They submitted that they had eventually been informed by their lawyer, following the receipt of information submitted by the Government to the Court in the context of the application of Rule 39 of the Rules of Court, that deportation and detention orders had been issued against them.
From the documents submitted by the Government, it appears that at least another fourteen of the detainees were to be deported on 14 June 2010 (this figure is stated in documents submitted by the Government with no further details).
On Saturday, 12 June 2010, the applicants, along with forty-two other persons of Kurdish origin, submitted a Rule 39 request in order to prevent their imminent deportation to Syria.
On 14 June 2010 the President of the First Section decided to apply Rule 39, indicating to the respondent Government that the detainees should not be deported to Syria until the Court had had the opportunity to receive and examine all the documents pertaining to their claim. The parties were requested under Rule 54 § 2 (a) of the Rules of Court to submit information and documents concerning the asylum applications and the deportation.
On 21 September 2010 the President of the First Section reconsidered the application of Rule 39 in the light of information provided by the parties. He decided to maintain the interim measure in respect of five cases, including the present ones. Rule 39 was lifted with regard to the thirty-nine remaining cases (for further details see M.A., cited above, § 58).
Rule 39 was subsequently lifted with regard to three cases, but remained in force in the present two applications.
On 24 January 2011 the applicants filed habeas corpus applications with the Supreme Court claiming that their continued detention from 11 June 2010 had violated Article 15 of Directive 2008/115/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 16 December 2008 on common standards and procedures in Members states for returning illegally staying third-country nationals, “the EU Returns Directive”. The applicants, relying on the Court’s judgment in Chahal v. the United Kingdom, 15 November 1996, (Reports of Judgments and Decisions 1996V) and the Commission’s report in Samie Ali v. Switzerland (no. 24881/94, Commission’s report of 26 February 1997) also claimed that their detention had breached Article 11 (2) of the Constitution and Article 5 § 1 of the Convention (see M.A., § 50, cited above).
The Supreme Court set the applications for directions for 31 January 2011. On that date the Government asked for a few days so they could file an objection to the applications. They were given until 4 February 2011 and the habeas corpus applications were set for hearing on 9 February 2011. The parties were also requested to prepare a short note with the issues they would address and to produce it on the day of the hearing.
The Government filed their objection on 4 February 2011.
On 10 February 2011 the parties appeared before the court and submitted their written addresses. The hearing of the applications was held. Judgment was reserved on the same day.
On 23 February 2011 the Supreme Court dismissed the applications. With regard to the preliminary issues raised, the Supreme Court first of all held that it had the competence to examine the applications as it was called upon to examine the lawfulness of the applicants’ protracted detention and within the context of a habeas corpus application, examine the conformity of their detention with Article 15 (3) of the EU Returns Directive and Article 11 (2) not the lawfulness of the deportation and detention orders. The applicants were not estopped from bringing a habeas corpus application just because they had not challenged the deportation and detention orders issued against them. Even if the lawfulness of the detention was assumed, detention for the purpose of deportation could not be indefinite and the detainee left without the right to seek his release. The Supreme Court also rejected the argument that the applicants were estopped from bringing the application because their continued detention had been brought about by their own action, that is, by their application to the Strasbourg Court for an interim measure suspending their deportation.
The Supreme Court then examined the substance of the applications. It noted that the EU Returns Directive had direct effect in the domestic law, as the period for transposition had expired and the Directive had not been transposed. It could therefore be relied on in the proceedings. However, it went on to hold that the six-month period provided for in the Directive had not yet started to run. The applicants had been arrested on 11 June 2010 with a view to their deportation but had not been deported by the Government in view of the application by the Court on 14 June 2010 of Rule 39 and the issuing of an interim measure suspending their deportation. Consequently, the authorities had not been able to deport them even though, as they stated before the court, they had been ready to do so from 18 June 2010. As the applicants themselves had taken steps to suspend their deportation, the ensuing time could not be held against the Government and could not be taken into account for the purposes of Article 15 (5) and (6) of the Directive. The six-month period would start to run from the moment that the interim measure had been lifted. From that moment onwards the Government had been under an obligation in accordance with Article 15 (1) of the Directive to proceed with the applicants’ deportation with due diligence. The situation would have been different if the deportation had not been effected owing to delays attributable to the authorities.
In so far as the applicants’ complaints under Article 11 (2) of the Constitution and Article 5 § 1 of the Convention were concerned, the Supreme Court distinguished the applicants’ situation from those in the cases they relied on and in which responsibility for the protracted detention lay with the authorities. Further, it held that it had not been shown that the continued detention of the applicants had been arbitrary, abusive and contrary to the Court’s case-law (see paragraph 48 above).
The applicants lodged two separate appeals with the Supreme Court (appellate jurisdiction) on 17 March 2011. Another two appeals were lodged at the same time by M.A. (see M.A., §§ 54, cited above) and another Syrian of Kurdish origin (see K.F. v. Cyprus, no. 41858/10, § 62, 21 July 2015).
The applicants sent a letter dated 13 April 2011 to the Registrar of the Supreme Court requesting that the appeals be fixed for pre-trial within a “short period of time” and then for hearing.
The applicants were released on 20 May 2011 following revocation of the deportation and detention orders of 11 June 2010 by the Permanent Secretary of the Ministry of the Interior. They were informed on 17 May 2011 by a letter dated 10 May 2011 that they would be issued with a special residence/employment permit under the Aliens and Immigration Law and the relevant Regulations for a period of six months from the date of their release with a possibility of further renewal. However, prior to the issuance of this permit they were obliged to sign a contract of employment with an employer indicated and approved by the Department of Labour. The applicants were also asked to report to the police once a month.
On 15 July 2011 the Supreme Court informed the applicants that one of the other appeals that had been filed at the same time as theirs was set down for hearing for 12 September 2011.
On 7 September 2011 the applicants’ lawyer filed an application for joining the four appeals (see paragraph 55 above).
On 12 September 2011 the Supreme Court issued an order joining the appeals and also instructed the parties to file their written addresses. The applicants submitted that on this date the court was informed that they had been released.
On 8 November 2011 the applicants filed an application requesting an extension of twenty days for filing their written addresses. These were filed on 28 November 2011.
On 17 March 2012 the appeals were set for directions.
On 18 July 2012 the Government filed an application requesting the parties to appear before the Supreme Court and requested a forty-day extension for filing their written address. This was granted and the appeals were set down for hearing on 11 September 2012.
In the meantime, the Government filed their written address on 28 August 2012.
On 11 September 2012 the hearing was held and judgment was reserved.
The appeals were dismissed on 15 October 2012. The Supreme Court held that as the applicants had, in the meantime, been released, the application was without object (see M.A., cited above, § 55).
The applicants submitted that following their release on 20 May 2011 the authorities did not grant them residence permits. The applicants were not able to fulfil the terms and conditions imposed by the Ministry of Interior in order to have residence permits. Their issuing was subject to finding an employer approved by the Department of Labour and to present to the immigration authorities an approved contract of employment. The applicants could not find and/or were not referred by the Department of Labour to an approved employer despite their numerous attempts to that effect. Their situation was explained to the competent authorities in a letter dated 28 July 2011 to which they never received a reply. As a result they were not able to regularise their stay in Cyprus and had no access to any rights apart from a tolerated residence status.
On 24 November 2012, at 9.45 a.m., the applicants, along with another Syrian couple who had three children, were stopped at Paphos airport while they attempted to take a flight to Bergamo-Milano in Italy by using false Bulgarian passports. During passport control, the police officer in charge suspected that their passports were false because the colour of the page containing the biometric data differed to that used in genuine passports. The applicants were then requested to give a sample of their signatures. These did not correspond to those in the passports they had presented. After having being questioned by the officer they admitted that the passports were not their own and revealed their true personal details. An immigration officer carried out a search of their immigration status and ascertained that they were failed asylum seekers as their appeal to the Reviewing Authority been dismissed and they did not have valid residence permits.
According to the statement of the police officer taken on the same date, the applicants were arrested for committing the flagrant offences of personation and unlawful stay in the Republic (see paragraphs 86 and 114 below). The second applicant was arrested at 1 p.m. and the first applicant at 1.05 pm. In his statement the police officer stated that he had drawn their attention to the law and that the second applicant replied “I made a mistake”. The officer also noted that their legal rights had been explained to them in the Arabic language by an interpreter. The other couple was also arrested and the social welfare office was contacted concerning the children. Around 2 p.m. they were all taken to the Paphos Criminal Investigation Department (CID).
The second applicant along with the other man, was then arrested by virtue of an arrest warrant issued by the District Court of Paphos at 2.20 pm the same day pursuant to section 18 of Criminal Procedure Law (Cap. 155; see paragraph 116 below) on the ground that there had been reasonable suspicion based on evidence that he had been involved in a conspiracy to commit a felony, forgery, circulation of a forged document, personation and unlawful stay in the Republic between 15 September 2009 and 14 November 2012. There is a handwritten signed note on the warrant by the arresting police officer stating that he arrested the second applicant at 2.40 p.m. at Paphos CID and that with the assistance of an interpreter he had informed him of the reasons for his arrest, had drawn his attention to the law and that the second applicant had replied “I did it for a better life”.
The second applicant also signed a document containing his rights to communication as set out in sections 3 and 4 of Law 163(I)/of 2005 (see paragraphs 36 above and 113 below). The copy of the document signed by him was in Arabic.
The second applicant was then questioned by a police officer with the assistance of an interpreter and gave a written statement. The statement was then translated into Arabic. The first part of the statement contains the information given to him by the police officer which reads as follows:
“I inform you that I am investigating a case of conspiracy to commit a felony, forgery, uttering false documents and personation and unlawful stay on the territory of the Republic, offences that were committed between 26 March 2010 and 24 November 2012 in Paphos, for which I have evidence which gives me reasonable suspicion that you are implicated. I wish to question you and to take your statement. You are not obliged to say anything unless you wish to do so but anything you say may be written down and used as evidence”.
The second applicant signed next to this paragraph.
In his statement the second applicant stated that he had decided to leave Cyprus, as following his release and the expiry of the six-months, he was not given another residence and work permit (see paragraph 57 above). He also admitted that he had bought the passports from a Kurdish national for the amount of 1100 euros (EUR) and explained how these were secured. The applicants intended to leave Cyprus and go to Germany through Italy. He also apologised for what happened “today” and that he had done it because he could no longer live in Cyprus. The statement was read to the applicant by the interpreter; he confirmed it and signed it. A statement was also given by the interpreter.
According to the relevant police report of Paphos CID, the first applicant and the other woman stated that they did not know anything about the passports and that their husbands had organised everything.
At around 4.10 p.m. both women were released from custody as they were both pregnant and the one also had three children.
The following day, 25 November 2012, the second applicant was taken to the Paphos District Court and was remanded in custody for four days for the purposes of further investigation of the alleged commission of a number of offences by the applicants under the Criminal Code and the Aliens and Immigration Law; in particular, the offences of conspiracy to commit a felony, forgery, uttering false documents and personation (sections 371, 331, 333, 334, 337, 339 and 360 of the Criminal Code, Cap. 154) and unlawful stay in the Republic (section 19 (l) (l) of the Aliens and Immigration Law)(see paragraphs 86, 114 and 115 below).
On 28 November 2012, following the conclusion of the police investigation, the case file was transmitted to the office of the Attorney-General for the purposes of deciding whether the applicants would be subject to criminal prosecution. The Attorney-General at the time, decided not to prosecute the applicants because of the particularity of their cases. He gave instructions to the police to proceed with the deportation of the applicants when the situation in Syria would allow it.
On 29 November 2012, upon expiry of the second applicant’s remand, detention and deportation orders were issued pursuant to section 14(6) of the Aliens and Immigration Law on the ground that the second applicant was a prohibited immigrant within the meaning of section 6 (1) (k) and (l) of that law (see M.A., § 62, cited above). On the same day the second applicant was served with a letter informing him of the decision to detain and deport him on the ground that he was an illegal immigrant as he had stayed unlawfully in the Republic. It also informed him that he had the right to file a recourse against these orders before the Supreme Court.
The Government submitted that on the same day the execution of the deportation order was suspended as “it transpired” that the Court’s interim measure under Rule 39 was still in force.
The second applicant was detained at Paphos Police Station Detention Facility until 21 December 2013 when he was released following a decision by the Permanent Secretary of the Ministry of the Interior to revoke the deportation and detention orders. The conditions attached to his release were set out in a letter dated 20 December 2013 given him on the date of his release. In particular, the second applicant was requested to hand over his passport to the Aliens and Immigration police. He would be given a certified copy of the passport which would allow the issuance of a residence permit or any other permit. A special residence/employment permit would then be issued for a period of six months. Prior to the issuance of this permit, however, the second applicant would have to sign a contract of employment with an employer indicated and approved by the Department of Labour. The second applicant was also obliged to report to the nearest police station once a month and to inform the authorities of a change of address.
The second applicant submitted that although he found employment he was informed by the Department of Labour that the employer in question did not fall within the categories entitled to employ him. The Department of Labour did not refer him to an eligible employer. The first applicant submitted that she was not given any terms or conditions of residence. They both therefore remained in an irregular situation.
The entry, residence and deportation of aliens are regulated by the Aliens and Immigration Law of 1959 (Cap. 105, as amended).
Under section 6(1) of the Law a person is not permitted to enter the Republic if he is a “prohibited immigrant”. This category includes any person who enters or resides in the country contrary to any prohibition, condition, restriction or limitation contained in the Law or in any permit granted or issued under the Law (section 6(1)(k)), any person who was deported from the Republic either on the basis of the Law or on the basis of any other legislation in force at the time of his or her deportation (section 6(1)(i)) and any alien who wishes to enter the Republic as an immigrant, but does not have in his or her possession an immigration permit granted in accordance with the relevant regulations (section 6(1)(l)). Furthermore, a person can be considered to be a “prohibited immigrant” on, inter alia, grounds of public order, legal order or public morals or if he or she constitutes a threat to peace (section 6(1)(g)).
Under the Law the deportation and, in the meantime, the detention of any alien who is considered “a prohibited immigrant” can be ordered by the Chief Immigration Officer, who is the Minister of the Interior (section 14). Section 14(6) provides that a person against whom a detention and/or deportation order has been issued shall be informed in writing, in a language which he understands, of the reasons for this decision, unless this is not desirable on public-security grounds, and has the right to be represented before the competent authorities and to request the services of an interpreter. In addition, Regulation 19 of the Aliens and Immigration Regulations of 1972 (as amended) provides that when the Immigration Officer decides that a person is a prohibited immigrant, written notice to that effect must be served on that person in accordance with the second schedule of the Regulations (see M.A., §§ 63-64, cited above).
Unauthorised entry and/or stay (section 19(1)(l) of the Aliens and Immigration Law) in Cyprus are criminal offences. Until November 2011, they were punishable by imprisonment or a fine (section 19(2)) of the Aliens and Immigration Law). Law 153(I)/2011, which entered into force in November 2011, removed the punishment of imprisonment but retained the criminal nature of the contraventions and their punishment with a fine (section 18). Such punishment is not applicable to asylum seekers.
Pursuant to section 7(1) of the Refugee Law a person who has entered the Republic illegally will not be subject to punishment solely on the basis of his illegal entry or residence, provided that he appears without unjustified delay before the authorities and gives the reasons for his illegal entry or residence. Section 7(4)(a) prohibits the detention of an asylum seeker for the sole reason of being an asylum seeker. Under section 7(4)(b) detention is allowed by a court order either for establishing his or her identity or nationality in a case where the asylum seeker is not in possession of valid travel or identity documents; or for the examination of new elements which he or she wishes to submit in order to prove his or her claim relating to his or her asylum application, when this has been rejected at first as well as at second instance and a deportation order has been issued against him or her. Section 7(5) provides that detained asylum seekers must be informed in a language they understand, of the reasons for their detention as well as their legal rights, including the right to appoint a lawyer. Under section 7 (6) the detention may not exceed eight days. The detention may be extended for further eight-day terms upon order of the court, but the total detention period shall in no case exceed thirty-two days.
Deportation and detention orders can be challenged before the Supreme Court by way of administrative recourse under Article 146(1) of the Constitution of the Republic of Cyprus. This provision provides as follows:
“The Supreme Constitutional Court shall have exclusive jurisdiction to adjudicate finally on a recourse made to it on a complaint that a decision, an act or omission of any organ, authority or person, exercising any executive or administrative authority is contrary to any of the provisions of this Constitution or of any law or is made in excess or in abuse of powers vested in such organ or authority or person.”
A recourse must be made within seventy-five days of the date when the decision or act was published or, if it was not published and in the case of an omission, when it came to the knowledge of the person making the recourse (Article 146(3)). Should the recourse succeed, the power of the Supreme Court is confined to declaring an act or decision null or void, or, in the case of an omission, that it ought not to have occurred, in that what had not been done should have been done (Article 146(4)).
The jurisdiction of the Supreme Court under Article 146 is limited to reviewing the legality of the act, decision or omission in question on the basis of the facts and circumstances existing at the time the act, decision or omission occurred. The Supreme Court will not go into the merits of the decision and substitute the decision of the administrative authority or organ concerned with its own decision; it will not decide the matter afresh. If the Supreme Court annuls the act or decision in question, the matter is automatically remitted to the appropriate administrative authority or organ for re-examination (see the domestic case-law citations in Sigma Radio Television Ltd v. Cyprus, nos. 32181/04 and 35122/05, § 73, 21 July 2011).
Article 146 (6) provides for compensation as follows:
“Any person aggrieved by any decision or act declared to be void under paragraph 4 of this Article or by any omission declared thereunder that it ought not to have been made shall be entitled, if his claim is not met to his satisfaction by the organ, authority or person concerned, to institute legal proceedings in a court for the recovery of damages or for being granted other remedy and to recover just and equitable damages to be assessed by the court or to be granted such other just and equitable remedy as such court is empowered to grant”.
The Supreme Court has held that the lawfulness of deportation and detention orders can only be examined in the context of a recourse brought under Article 146 of the Constitution and not in the context of a habeas corpus application (see, for example, the Supreme Court’s judgment of 30 December 2004 in Elena Bondar appeal no. 12166 against the refusal of an application for a writ of habeas corpus, (2004) 1 (C) CLR 2075).
A recourse does not have automatic suspensive effect under domestic law. In order to suspend deportation an application must be made seeking a provisional order. The Supreme Court has the power to issue provisional orders, suspending the enforcement of the decision taken by the administrative authority, pending the hearing of the case on the merits. A provisional order is an exceptional discretionary measure and is decided on a case-by-case basis (rule 13 of the Supreme Constitutional Court Rules 1962). The Supreme Court will grant a provisional order if an applicant establishes that the contested decision is tainted by flagrant illegality or that he or she will suffer irreparable damage from its enforcement (see amongst a number of authorities, Stavros Loizides v. the Ministry of Foreign Affairs (1995) 3 C.L.R. 233; Elpida Krokidou and others v. the Republic, (1990) 3C C.L.R. 1857; and Sydney Alfred Moyo & another v. the Republic (1988) 3 CLR 1203).
Until recently, domestic law did not provide for legal aid in respect of a recourse under Article 146 of the Constitution against deportation and detention orders. In 2012 the Legal Aid Law (Law no. 165(I)/2002) was amended, enabling illegally staying third-country nationals to apply for legal aid (section 6C, Amending Law 8(I)/2012). However, legal aid is limited to first-instance proceedings and will be granted only if the recourse is deemed to have a reasonable chance of success (sections 6 C (2)(aa) and (bb)).
The Cypriot Government assumed responsibility for assessing asylum claims from 1 January 2002. An Asylum Service was established for this purpose in the Migration Department of the Ministry of Interior. Prior to that, the UNHCR dealt with such claims.
Asylum seekers can appeal against decisions by the Asylum Service to the Reviewing Authority, which was established by the Refugee Law (Law 6 (I) of 2000, as amended). Procedures before the Asylum Service and the Reviewing Authority are suspensive: asylum seekers have a right under section 8 (1) of the Refugee Law to remain in the Republic pending the examination of their claim and, if lodged, their appeal. Although the authorities retain the power to issue deportation and detention orders against an applicant during this period, such orders can only be issued on grounds which are unrelated to the asylum application, for example, the commission of a criminal offence, and they are subject to the suspensive effect (see the Supreme Court’s judgment of 30 December 2004 in the case of Asad Mohammed Rahal v the Republic of Cyprus (2004) 3 CLR 741).
The decision of the Reviewing Authority can be challenged before the Supreme Court by way of administrative recourse under Article 146 (1) of the Constitution (see paragraphs 88-91 above). According to section 8 of the Refugee Law, however, following the decision of the Reviewing Authority, an applicant has no longer the right to remain in the Republic. A recourse does not have automatic suspensive effect (see paragraph 92 above).
Section 6B of the Legal Aid Law (Law no. 165(I)/2002 as amended by Amending Law 132(I)/2009), provides that asylum-seekers may apply for legal aid in respect of a recourse brought under Article 146 of the Constitution against decisions by the Asylum Service and the Reviewing Authority. As in the case of deportation and detention (see paragraph 93 above), legal aid will only be granted in respect of the firstinstance proceedings (section 6 B (2)(aa)) and if there is a prospect of success (section 6B(2)(bb)).
Amending Law 9(I)/2013 introduced amendments to the Refugee Law concerning the examination of a subsequent application or new elements after a final decision has been issued. According to section 16D such an application or new elements to the initial asylum claim, should be submitted before the administrative authority which issued the final decision on the claim, that is either the Asylum Service or the Reviewing Authority (section 16D (1)-(3)). Pursuant to section 16D (1) the competent authority examines such an application or elements as soon as possible. The competent authority does not treat these cases as new applications or administrative appeals but as further steps to the initial application or initial appeal (section 16D(4)). The competent authority carries out a preliminary examination to see whether there were new elements which it had not taken into account when it had issued its decision (Section 16D 5(a)). If it decides that the subsequent application or new elements are admissible it will proceed to examine the substance after informing the applicant (section 16D 5(b)). The competent authority will only issue a new decision that can be executed if the elements increase the chances of the applicant receiving international protection, and if it is satisfied that the applicant could not have submitted these elements in the initial examination, due to no fault of his and her own (section 16D 5(b)). If the above requirements, however, are not satisfied then the decision refusing to admit the new elements or the new application is not considered a new decision but a confirmation of the previous decision taken. An appeal lies against the negative decision of the competent authority or its decision not to admit the new evidence, with the Supreme Court under Article 146 of the Constitution.
Section 8 (1) of the Refugee Law is not applicable to applicants during the procedure under section 16D (section 16D (6)(a)). If the competent authority considers that an examination of the substance is necessary, it will provide the applicant with an attestation. The applicant then has a right to remain in the Republic during the procedure (section 16D (6)(b) and (c)).
At the material time, Directive 2008/115/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 16 December 2008 on common standards and procedures in Member States for returning illegally staying thirdcountry nationals, “the EU Returns Directive”, had not been transposed into Cypriot domestic law. As the deadline for transposition expired on 24 December 2010 (see Article 20 of the Directive) the Directive had direct effect in domestic law and could therefore be relied on by an individual in court (see for example the Supreme Court judgments of 18 January 2011 in the case of Shanmukan Uthajenthiran, habeas corpus application no. 152/2010 and of 20 January 2011, and the case of Irfam Ahmad, habeas corpus application 5/2011).
In accordance with Article 15 §§ 5 and 6 of the Directive, detention may be maintained as long as the conditions laid down in subsection 6 are in place, but not longer than six months. Exceptionally, if a deportee refuses to cooperate with the authorities, or there are delays in the obtaining of the necessary travel documents, or the deportee represents a national security or public order risk, detention may be prolonged for a further twelve months, to a maximum of eighteen months (see M.A., cited above, § 98). Article 15 § 2 of the Directive provides that Member States should either provide for a speedy judicial review of detention or grant the detainee the right to apply for such a review. Article 15 § 3 provides for review of detention in every case at reasonable intervals of time either on application by the third-country national concerned or ex officio and in the case of prolonged detention periods, that reviews shall be subject to the supervision of a judicial authority. The Directive has been invoked before the Supreme Court in habeas corpus proceedings in which detainees challenged the lawfulness of their protracted detention for the purpose of deportation (see, for example, Supreme Court judgments of 12 March 2012 in the case of Yuxian Wing, habeas corpus application no. 13/2012; of 8 January 2011 in the case of Shanmukan Uthajenthiran, cited above; and of 22 December 2011 in the case of Mostafa Haghilo, habeas corpus application no. 133/2011).
In November 2011, Law 153(I)/2011 introduced amendments to the Aliens and Immigration Law with the aim of transposing the “EU Returns Directive”. This Law expressly provides that habeas corpus applications before the Supreme Court challenging the lawfulness of detention with a view to deportation can be made on length grounds (for the previous situation, see Kane v. Cyprus (dec.), no. 33655/06, 13 September 2011). Further, pursuant to the above Law, the Minister of Interior should review detention orders on his or her own initiative every two months and at a reasonable time following an application by the detainee.
On 17 September 2014, the Commissioner for Administration of the Republic of Cyprus (hereinafter “the Ombudsman”) in her capacity as the Independent National Authority for Human Rights issued a report with her position concerning the procedures for examination of asylum applications by Syrians (action 8/2014). According to her report, this was instigated by increasing complaints before her office concerning various problems in the asylum procedure in the case of Syrians.
In her report the Ombudsman noted that she had received about 100 complaints with regard, in particular, to delays in examining applications by the competent authorities, ranging from one up to three years, and in certain cases even more, and the consequences these delays had on the asylum seekers. The complaints concerned asylum applications lodged by Syrians who arrived in Cyprus after the war had begun in Syria, requests for reopening of asylum files by failed asylum seekers or persons whose asylum files had been closed invoking the new situation in Syria, and persons who were already in Cyprus at the time the war broke out on another status and had applied for asylum due to this situation (sur place asylum seekers).
The Ombudsman carried out meetings with the Asylum Service (on 30 May 2014) and the Reviewing Authority (27 May 2014) in the context of the examination of the complaints. From the meeting with the Head of the Asylum Service it transpired that there had been an increase in the number of Syrian applicants both in relation to new applications but also with regard to reopening requests. Up to March 2014, 720 out of 1200 applications and requests pending had been introduced by Syrians. The Ombudsman was informed that Syrian applicants were considered prima facie eligible for complementary protection, unless it was ascertained after an interview and the examination of the application that the granting of refugee status was justified. For this reason applications by Syrians were subject to the normal examination procedure. The length of time required for the examination of the application or request depended on the particular circumstances of the cases. There were cases in which the examination was completed in fifteen days whilst in other cases more time was needed. An average period of six months was given as a rough estimate. Delays took place in more complex cases.
With regard to the proceedings with the Reviewing Authority, although it was acknowledged that the situation in Syria was in itself sufficient for the granting of at least complementary protection to applicants, the Authority still carried out a thorough examination of the application or request in order to ascertain whether the person concerned fulfilled the criteria for refugee status. The Reviewing Authority carried out a preliminary examination of the elements within ten days. If it considered that an examination of the substance was required it provided the person concerned with a confirmation which gave him the right to stay in the country until the final decision. In certain cases examination was discontinued when the application was without object, for example, when the person in question refused to co-operate, did not show up for the interview or had been deported. The Ombudsman was informed that in the recent months applicants had principally been given complementary protection. It was also noted that in all re-opening requests made since 2011 when the unrest in Syria started, no application by a Syrian had been dismissed. Although the authority tried to finish the proceedings within a year, there had been some cases in which there was a delay of two or three years.
The Ombudsman noted that according to the statistics of the Asylum Service, from 2011 until March 2014, 1044 applications and requests concerning 1494 persons, were lodged by Syrians for international protection. At the end of March 2014 about 720 applications were still pending. In 2011 and 2012 one Syrian was granted refugee status and three protection on humanitarian grounds whilst in 2013 and 2014 one Syrian was granted refugee status and complementary protection was given in 164 cases concerning 259 persons.
In her conclusions and suggestions the Ombudsman noted, inter alia, that the accumulation of applications and requests resulted in the persons concerned and their families to live in uncertainty and in some cases found themselves in danger of arrest, detention or deportation. They also were deprived of fundamental rights. The absence of status or a certificate as proof of their status led to various problems, such as lack of access to public and private services or to the job market. She observed that delays also occurred during the preliminary examination of new elements put forward in the context of a re-opening request. She recommended, in this regard, that despite the fact that section 16D provided for a preliminary examination of the elements, in the case of applications by Syrians, this could be confined to a confirmation of the Syrian origin of the applicants, as the situation in the country was in itself a ground for re-opening, irrespective of any other elements which might exist. Furthermore, even though the Refugee Law did not set a time-limit for the examination of applications and requests, it did provide that this should take place as soon as possible. It also appeared or could be implied that the legislator considered six months was an adequate time frame. This was confirmed by Directive 2013/32/EU of the European Parliament and of the Council of 26 June 2013 on common procedures for granting and withdrawing international protection which would become binding for Cyprus from 21 July 2015. The Ombudsman considered that the delays in the processing of applications and requests were not justified in light of the situation in Syria especially since Syrians were considered prima facie eligible for complementary protection. She recalled in this respect that the rights of asylum seekers (for example, access to the job market and certain social rights) were limited in comparison to those who had received international protection.
In conclusion, the Ombudsman recommended the following:
“- The competent authorities acknowledge the need for immediate, fast and effective response to the applications by Syrians, adopting different, faster and more flexible procedures, within the framework of the Law.
- The possibility to be examined of a fast track procedure for examining the data, for carrying out the interview within a shorter period of time or even omitting the interview, as and when permitted by the Law, in particular in the cases where the only – new – element is the unsettled situation in Syria, which could in itself constitute grounds for granting humanitarian protection status.
-The authorities involved to re-examine the possibility of granting refugee status to a larger number of applicants, having in mind the position of the UNHCR and also the recent practice of the abovementioned countries.
-All the authorities (including the Police) to find ways of immediate issuance and granting of confirmation that an application has been submitted – whether this concerns a new application or a reopening of a file - so that the rights of those concerned and affected are given immediate protection.
-The services to secure co-operation with translators to be of service in the immediate expediting of carrying out interviews and, by extension, faster decision making, for the length of time required.
-The possibility to be investigated of increasing, for a certain amount of time, the number of staff of the Asylum Service who examine applications, or even of restructuring the existing system as well, so that pending applications may be dealt with immediately and a larger number of officers is involved in the main competence of the Service, which is the examination of applications for asylum.”
Part II of the Constitution contains provisions safeguarding fundamental human rights and liberties. Article 11 protects the right to liberty and security. It reads as follows, in so far as relevant:
“1. Every person has the right to liberty and security of person.
No person shall be deprived of his liberty save in the following cases when and as provided by law:
...
(b) the arrest or detention of a person for non-compliance with the lawful order of a court;
(c) the arrest or detention of a person effected for the purpose of bringing him before the competent legal authority on reasonable suspicion of having committed an offence or when it is reasonably considered necessary to prevent his committing an offence or fleeing after having done so;
...
(f) the arrest or detention of a person to prevent him effecting an unauthorised entry into the territory of the Republic or of an alien against whom action is being taken with a view to deportation or extradition.
Save when and as provided by law in case of a flagrant offence punishable with death or imprisonment, no person shall be arrested save under the authority of a reasoned judicial warrant issued according to the formalities prescribed by the law.
Every person arrested shall be informed at the time of his arrest in a language which he understands of the reasons for his arrest and shall be allowed to have the services of a lawyer of his own choosing.
The person arrested shall, as soon as is practicable after his arrest, and in any event not later than twenty-four hours after the arrest, be brought before a judge, if not earlier released.
The judge before whom the person arrested is brought shall promptly proceed to inquire into the grounds of the arrest in a language understandable by the person arrested and shall, as soon as possible and in any event not later than three days from such appearance, either release the person arrested on such terms as he may deem fit or where the investigation into the commission of the offence for which he has been arrested has not been completed remand him in custody and may remand him in custody from time to time for a period not exceeding eight days at any one time:
Provided that the total period of such remand in custody shall not exceed three months of the date of the arrest on the expiration of which every person or authority having the custody of the person arrested shall forthwith set him free.
Any decision of the judge under this paragraph shall be subject to appeal.
Every person who is deprived of his liberty by arrest or detention shall be entitled to take proceedings by which the lawfulness of his detention shall be decided speedily by a court and his release ordered if the detention is not lawful.
Every person who has been the victim of arrest or detention in contravention of the provisions of this Article shall have an enforceable right to compensation”.
The cases relied on by the parties regarding “suspensiveness” and “speediness” in deportation and detention cases are set out in detail in M.A. (§§ 77-84, cited above) as are the relevant provisions of the Police Law, the Public Roads Law and the Prevention of Pollution of Public Roads and Places Law (ibid., §§ 89-92).
In addition, the following provisions of domestic law as applicable at the material time are relevant for the purposes of the present applications.
The Law on the Rights of Persons who are Arrested and Detained (Law 163(I)/2005) introduced a number of provisions regulating the rights and treatment of arrestees held in custody. It provides, inter alia, for the right of a person who is arrested by the police to a private telephone call to a lawyer of his or her choice immediately after his or her arrest (section 3 (1) (a), to a relative or other person (section 3(1)(b) and, for foreign nationals to a consular or diplomatic representative in Cyprus of his country (section 4).
The relevant sections of the Criminal Code provide as follows:
“When in this Code, no punishment is specially provided for any misdemeanour, it shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term not exceeding two years or with a fine not exceeding one thousand five hundred pounds or with both such punishments.”
“Forgery is the making of a false document with intent to defraud.”
“ Any person makes a false document who-
(a) makes a document purporting to be what in fact document it is not;
(a) alters a document without authority in such a manner that if the alteration had been authorised it would have altered the effect of the document;
(c) introduces into a document without authority whilst it is being drawn up matter which if it had been authorised would have altered the effect of the document;
(d) signs a document-
(i) in the name of any person without his authority whether such name is or is not the same as that of the person signing;
(ii) in the name of any fictitious person alleged to exist whether the fictitious person is or is not alleged to be of the same name as the person signing;
(iii) in the name represented as being the name of a different person from that of the person signing it and intended to be mistaken for the name of that person;
(iv) in the name of a person personated by the person signing the document provided that the effect of the instrument depends upon the identity between the person signing the document and the person whom he professes to be.”
“An intent to defraud is presumed to exist if it appears that at the time when the false document was made there was in existence a specific person ascertained or unascertained capable of being defrauded thereby and this presumption is not rebutted by proof that the offender took or intended to take measures to prevent such person from being defrauded in fact; nor by the fact that he had or thought he had a right to the thing to be obtained by the false document.”
“Any person who forges any judicial or official document shall be liable to imprisonment for ten years.”
“Any person who knowingly and fraudulently utters a false document is guilty of a criminal offence of the same kind, and is liable to the same punishment as if he had forged the thing in question.”
“Any person who, with intent to defraud any person, falsely represents himself to be some other person, living or dead, is guilty of a misdemeanour.
If the representation is that the offender is a person entitled by will or operation of law to any specific property and he commits the offence to obtain such property or possession thereof, he is liable to imprisonment for seven years.”
Part IX of the Criminal Code deals with attempts and conspiracies to commit crimes. Section 371 provides as follows:
“Any person who conspires with another to commit any felony, or to do any act in any part of the world which if done in the Republic would be a felony, and which is an offence under the laws in force in the place where it is proposed to be done, is guilty of a felony, and is liable,- if no other punishment is provided, to imprisonment for seven years, or, if the greatest punishment to which a person convicted of the felony in question is liable is less than imprisonment for seven years, then to such lesser punishment.”
The relevant sections of the Criminal Procedure Law provide as follows:
“14. (1) Any police officer may, without warrant, arrest any person-
(a) whom he suspects upon reasonable grounds of having committed an offence punishable with death or imprisonment for a term exceeding two years;
(b) who commits in his presence any offence punishable with imprisonment;
...”
“18. (1) When a judge is satisfied by a written affidavit that there is reasonable suspicion for belief that a person has committed an offence or when the arrest or detention is considered reasonably necessary to prevent the commission of an offence or absconding after its commission, the judge may issue a warrant (which shall be referred to in this Law as a warrant of arrest) which shall authorise the arrest of the person against whom the warrant is directed.
(2) A warrant of arrest may be issued on any day including a Sunday or public holiday.”
“19. (1) Every warrant of arrest shall bear the signature of the judge issuing the same, the date and time of issue, as well as confirmation by the judge that he has been reasonably satisfied as to the existence of the need to issue the warrant.
(2) Every such warrant shall state shortly the criminal offence or matter for which it is issued, shall name or otherwise describe the person to be arrested and shall order the police officer or other person to whom it is directed to apprehend the person against whom it is issued and bring him before the Court issuing the warrant or before some other Court having jurisdiction in the case, to answer to the statement of the criminal offence or matter therein mentioned and to be further dealt with according to law.
(3) Every such warrant shall normally be directed generally to all police officers; but any Judge issuing such a warrant may, if its immediate execution is necessary and no police officer is immediately available, direct it to any other person or persons, and such person or persons shall execute the same, and when a warrant is directed to more police officers or persons than one, it rnay be executed by all or by any one or more of them.
(4) Every such warrant shall remain in force until it is executed or until it is cancelled by a Judge.”
“Where it shall be made to appear to a Judge that the investigation into the commission of an offence for which a person has been arrested has not been completed, it shall be lawful for the Judge, whether or not he has jurisdiction to deal with the offence for which the investigation is made, upon application made by a police officer, not below the rank of an inspector, to remand, from time to time, such arrested person in the custody of the police for such time not exceeding eight days at any one time as the Court shall think fit, the day following the remand being counted as the first day.”
A number of relevant international texts and documents, are set out in M.A. (cited above, §§ 94-105).
In addition, the following material is relevant for the purposes of the present applications.
Since unrest gripped the country in March 2011, the situation in Syria has severely deteriorated.
In October 2014 the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) updated his information on International Protection Considerations with regard to people fleeing the Syrian Arab Republic (Update III of 27 October 2014). This constitutes the fourth update following his position paper on 2 March 2012 in which he had recommended that States adopt a moratorium on all returns to Syria, pending an assessment of when the changed situation in the country would permit return in safety and dignity (UNHCR “International Protection Considerations with regard to people fleeing the Syrian Arab Republic”, June and December 2012 and October 2013). According to the paper, the situation in Syria had severely deteriorated in terms of security, human rights, displacement and humanitarian needs. Nearly all parts of the country were now embroiled in violence, which was playing out between different actors in partially overlapping conflicts and was exacerbated by the participation of foreign fighters on all sides. As international efforts to find a political solution to the Syria situation had so far not been successful, the conflict, continued to cause further civilian casualties, displacement and destruction of the country’s infrastructure. The paper noted that by April 2014 the number of persons killed as a result of the conflict had reportedly surpassed 191,000 and hundreds of thousands of people wounded. The conflict in Syria had caused the largest refugee displacement crisis of our times, with Syrians now the world’s largest refugee population under UNHCR’s mandate. It continued to generate increasing levels of displacement each day with an average of 100,000 refugees arriving in host countries in the region every month in 2014.
The paper points out that according to the UN Secretary-General, “[T]he conflict continues to be characterized by horrendous violations of international humanitarian law and human rights abuses, with a total disregard for humanity” and the Independent Commission of Inquiry summarised in its most recent report the impact of the conduct of the warring parties on civilians as “immeasurable suffering”. Parties to the conflict were reported to commit war crimes and gross violations of human rights, including acts amounting to crimes against humanity, with widespread impunity. UNHCR characterised the flight of civilians from Syria as a refugee movement. Syrians, and Palestine refugees who had their former habitual residence in Syria, required international protection until such time as the security and human rights situation in Syria improved significantly and conditions for voluntary return in safety and dignity were met.
The UNHCR urged countries to ensure that persons fleeing Syria, including Palestine refugees and other habitual residents of Syria, were admitted to their territory and were able to seek asylum. The entry and admission of persons having fled Syria needed to be dealt with in a protection-sensitive manner, regardless of whether they resorted to seeking entry without appropriate documentation or in an otherwise irregular manner. UNHCR appealed to all States to ensure that Syrian civilians were protected from refoulement and afforded international protection, the form of which might vary depending on the processing and reception capacity of countries receiving them, while guaranteeing respect for basic human rights.
UNHCR considered that most Syrians seeking international protection were likely to fulfil the requirements of the refugee definition contained in Article 1A(2) of the 1951 Convention relating to the Status of Refugees, since they would have a well-founded fear of persecution linked to one of the Convention grounds. It also considered that it would not be appropriate to return nationals or habitual residents of Syria to neighbouring and non-neighbouring countries in the region of Syria. It also noted that in light of the developments and changed circumstances in Syria, it may be appropriate to reopen case files of Syrians whose asylum claim were rejected in the past, to the extent that has not yet been done, so as to ensure that those who as a result of changed circumstances have a valid sur place claim have it appropriately adjudicated, enabling them to benefit from protection and entitlements flowing from refugee recognition.
The United Kingdom Home office’s Information and Guidance Note on Syria of December 2014 summarised its policy as follows:
“Case-law has established that it is likely that a failed asylum seeker or forced returnee would, in general, on return to Syria face a real risk of arrest and detention and of serious mistreatment during that detention as a result of imputed political opinion. The position might be otherwise in the case of someone who, notwithstanding a failed claim for asylum, would still be perceived on return to Syria as a supporter of the Assad regime.
Most Syrian nationals are therefore likely to qualify for refugee protection unless excluded (this regards persons in respect of whom there are serious reasons for considering that they were involved in or associated with war crimes and attacks against civilians or with the groups concerned (paragraph 1.3.9 of the Note).
Where a person is excluded from refugee protection they will also be excluded from Humanitarian Protection but may be entitled to Discretionary leave or Restricted Leave.
The humanitarian crisis, which continues to deteriorate, is such that for most returnees removal would be a breach of Article 3 ECHR.
The level of indiscriminate violence in the main cities and areas of fighting in Syria is at such a level that substantial grounds exist for believing that a person, solely by being present there for any length of time, faces a real risk of harm which threatens their life or person.”
Last but not least, in his twelfth report issued on 19 February 2015 on the implementation of Security Council resolutions 2139 (2014), 2165 (2014) and 2191 (2104) on Syria, the SecretaryGeneral of the United Nations observed, inter alia, that widespread conflict and high levels of violence continued throughout the country and that the conduct of hostilities by all parties continued to be characterised by widespread disregard for the rules of international humanitarian law and for the protection of civilians.
In its press release of 18 March 2014, “Cyprus, abusive detention and migrants and asylum seekers flouts EU law” stated, inter alia, the following:
“Cypriot immigration authorities routinely detain hundreds of migrants and asylum-seekers in prison-like conditions for extended periods while awaiting deportation, said Amnesty International. Those detained include Syrian refugees and women separated from their young children.
Evidence gathered by researchers during a recent visit to Cyprus indicates that the authorities are exploiting European Union (EU) laws – imposing automatic detention of migrants and asylum-seekers without implementing the required safeguards, which make detention a last resort. The practice is also a breach of international law.
“By detaining scores of people for months at a time, Cyprus is displaying a chilling lack of compassion and a complete disregard for its international obligations,” said Sherif Elsayed-Ali, Head of Refugee and Migrants’ Rights at Amnesty International.
“It is shameful to think that within the EU people who have committed no crime are being held in harsh prison-like conditions for prolonged periods, in some cases for up to 18 months or longer. Amnesty International is concerned that Cyprus is using the systematic detention of migrants to intimidate and deter potential immigrants and asylum-seekers,” said Sherif Elsayed-Ali.
...
At least one person at the Menogia detention centre, the main immigration detention facility in Cyprus, had been held for 22 consecutive months while awaiting deportation. Under EU law, the maximum detention period on immigration grounds is 18 months.
...
Detention as a means of immigration control should only be used as a last resort. Detention may only be used after the authorities have demonstrated that it is both necessary and that less restrictive measures are insufficient. In Cyprus it appears to have become standard practice.
“The Cypriot authorities, seemingly eager to portray themselves as taking a tough stance on immigration, have displayed a ruthless and arbitrary attitude to locking up migrants. Many people have not received adequate information about the reasons for their detention and what is going to happen to them,” said Sherif Elsayed-Ali.
“The fact that EU laws allow people who have not committed a criminal offence to be effectively imprisoned for up to 18 months is appalling. The EU has – rightly - criticized prolonged detention without charge in other countries, but has legalised it in the EU. Current policies on dealing with migrants and asylum-seekers shame the EU.”
Although Cyprus’ immigration authorities told Amnesty International that alternatives to detention are available, the organization’s research indicates that these are seldom offered. Instead, deportation orders are issued at the same time as detention orders without considering alternatives. The Cypriot authorities have admitted to this practice.
Alternatives should always be explored before resorting to detention - anyone who is detained for immigration purposes should also undergo a regular and automatic judicial review of their detention.
Since Amnesty International last assessed detention conditions of migrants and asylum-seekers in Cyprus in 2011, the only positive development has been that they are no longer held in Nicosia’s central prison.
Amnesty International also found that nine Syrian refugees were among those detained at Menogia, during a visit on 6 March. At least one of them had applied for asylum.
“It is incomprehensible that the Cypriot authorities are detaining Syrian nationals in Menogia when it is Cyprus’ official policy not to return Syrians to Syria,” said Sherif Elsayed-Ali.
This is despite the fact that Cypriot authorities told Amnesty International that all Syrian nationals are provided with international protection status or humanitarian visas.
“We can only conclude that the detention of Syrian nationals is intended to send a message to other Syrians that they are not welcome in Cyprus.”
“Locking up migrants and asylum-seekers - including people who should be assumed to be refugees - for months, and treating them like prisoners is unacceptable,” said Sherif Elsayed Ali.”