The case originated in an application (no. 17343/04) against the Republic of Moldova lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by Flux (“the applicant newspaper”), a newspaper based in Chişinău, on 5 April 2004.
The applicant newspaper was represented by Mr V. Gribincea, a lawyer practising in Chişinău and a member of the non-governmental organisation Lawyers for Human Rights. The Moldovan Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Mr V. Grosu.
The applicant newspaper alleged, in particular, a breach of its right to freedom of expression on account of having been found guilty of defamation of a former Deputy Prosecutor General.
On 14 September 2006 the President of the Fourth Section of the Court decided to give notice of the application to the Government. Under the provisions of Article 29 § 3 of the Convention, it was decided to examine the merits of the application at the same time as its admissibility.
On 15 November 2002 Flux published an article entitled “The criminal case file of Eugenia Duca, like five kilograms of waste paper”. It reported on the evolution of a high-profile criminal case against a business woman, who was convicted at the time but was later acquitted and compensated for illegal prosecution and detention, and published in italicised script extracts from an open letter sent by her daughter to the President of the country, President of the Parliament, Prime Minister, Council of Europe, OSCE Mission in Moldova and other organisations. In the letter she complained of alleged abuses committed by the prosecution and by the judiciary against her mother. The letter contained, inter alia, the following sentence:
“On 10 July 2001, the Deputy Prosecutor General V.S. (subsequently dismissed for dubious affairs), signed the indictment in Eugenia Duca’s criminal case... and sent it to the Râşcani District Court without her even having seen it.”
On an unspecified date Mr V.S., who in the meantime was demoted, brought civil proceedings for defamation against the newspaper, arguing that the statement about his dismissal for dubious affairs was not true and that it was defamatory of him.
On 12 February 2003 the Buiucani District Court ruled in favour of Mr V.S., finding the statement that Mr V.S. had been dismissed for dubious affairs to be untrue and defamatory. It also found that V.S. was employed at the time at the Prosecutor’s Office attached to the Court of Appeal and ordered the newspaper to issue an apology within fifteen days and pay V.S. 2,700 Moldovan lei (178 euros (EUR)).
The applicant newspaper appealed against this judgment, arguing, inter alia, that the article was in fact a dissemination of statements made by Ms Duca’s daughter in her open letter. Relying on Jersild v. Denmark, judgment of 23 September 1994, Series A no. 298, the applicant newspaper argued that it could not be punished for disseminating statements made by third parties.
On 29 April 2003 the Chişinău Court of Appeal dismissed the appeal and upheld the judgment of the first-instance court. It did not examine the arguments advanced by the applicant newspaper concerning the dissemination of statements made by others. The applicant newspaper lodged an appeal on points of law and submitted that the expression “dubious affairs” had been a value judgment.
On 19 November 2003 the Supreme Court of Justice dismissed the appeal, finding that Mr V.S. had been dismissed from his position by a decision of the Parliament without any reasons being given. It did not examine the applicant newspaper’s arguments about the dissemination of statements made by a third person.
Article 7. Protection of honour and dignity
“(1)  Any natural or legal person shall be entitled to apply to the courts to seek the withdrawal of statements which are damaging to his or her honour and dignity if the person who made such statements cannot prove that they are true.
(2)  Where such information was made public by a media body, the court shall compel the publishing office of the media body to publish, not later then 15 days after the entry into force of the judicial decision, a withdrawal of the statements in the same column, on the same page or in the same programme or series of broadcasts.”
Article 7/1. Compensation for non-pecuniary damage
“(1)  Damage caused to a person as a result of circulation of statements which do not correspond to reality and are damaging to his or her honour or dignity shall be compensated by the responsible natural of legal person.
(2)  The amount of the award shall be determined by the court in each case as an amount equal to between 75 and 200 months’ minimum wages if the information has been circulated by a legal person and between 10 and 100 months’ minimum wages if the information has been circulated by a natural person.”