The case originated in an application (no. 41248/06) against the Republic of Lithuania lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by two Lithuanian nationals, Mr Piotras Bogdel and Ms Snežana Bogdel (“the applicants”), on 13 October 2006.
The applicants were represented by Mr V. Mikelėnas, a lawyer practising in Vilnius. The Lithuanian Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Ms E. Baltutytė.
The applicants alleged that when interpreting the period of statutory limitation relating to their civil claim the domestic courts had breached the principle of legal certainty, in violation of Article 6 § 1 of the Convention. They also argued that the annulment of their title to a plot of land in the town of Trakai was in breach of Article 1 of Protocol No. 1.
On 5 July 2010 the application was communicated to the Government. It was also decided to rule on the admissibility and merits of the application at the same time (Article 29 § 1).
The applicants were born in 1953 and 1986 respectively and live in Trakai.
By a decision of 12 March 1992 the Trakai City Council leased a plot of land 22 square metres in size, situated at no. 41 Karaimų Street in the town of Trakai, to Galina Bogdel, the wife of Piotras Bogdel and mother of Snežana Bogdel. The plot was situated on land which was State property. The plot was leased for a term of five years, for the construction of a kiosk (pastatas-kioskas) for selling pottery and souvenirs. The applicants stated that by February 1993 the kiosk had been built and was ready for use.
By decision no. 395v of 22 December 1993 the Trakai District Council established a territorial plan for the old town of Trakai city, on the basis of plans drawn up by experts on cultural heritage. The plans stipulated that plot no. 41 in Karaimų Street, situated at the entrance to Trakai castle, was not to be divided and was not to be privatised (“neprivatizuojama: salos pilies prieigos; ribos lieka esamos”).
By a decision of 27 July 1994 the Trakai District Executive Council leased to Galina Bogdel, for a term of five years, a State-owned plot of land of 134 square metres, which consisted of the previous plot and enlarged it.
On 18 January 1995 the Trakai District Executive Council adopted a decision approving the sale of the said plot of 134 square metres to Galina Bogdel for 2,874 Lithuanian litas (LTL).
On 10 February 1995 a representative of the Trakai District Executive Council and Galina Bogdel signed the land purchase agreement. The land purchase agreement was registered at the Real Estate Registry and, in accordance with Lithuanian law, Galina Bogdel became the owner of the land.
Later that year Galina Bogdel died and her husband and daughter (the applicants) inherited the plot of land with the kiosk. According to the applicants, they subsequently obtained the necessary permission and transformed the kiosk into a café.
In July 1998 the applicants contacted the Trakai District Municipality to request the enlargement of the plot of land they owned to roughly twice its size by the addition of more State land. They mentioned that the building they had erected at 41 Karaimų Street was being used as premises for public catering (kaip viešojo maitinimo patalpa). As the number of tourists in Trakai was constantly growing, there was a need to expand the premises in order to meet the hygiene and sanitary needs of a public catering facility. The municipality informed them that a new territorial plan was necessary and by a decision of 28 July 1998 entrusted the coordination of the planning project to the applicants.
Once preliminary plans had been published in the Trakai town newspaper in August 1999, wide repercussions in connection with the plot of land in issue arose in the local community of Trakai. In particular, on 19 August 1999 ten residents of Karaimų Street wrote to the Head of the Vilnius County Administration (hereinafter – “the HVCA”), the director of Trakai Historical National Park and the Mayor of Trakai claiming that some time ago a small building had been erected on the plot [it was not clear whether legally or illegally], and that it had now been turned into a noisy café. The residents asked the authorities not to permit any new construction on the plot, which was in a historical place – Trakai Historical National
Further, in accordance with the requirements of the Law on Territorial Planning, on 7 September 1999 a public meeting (viešas svarstymas) was held in Trakai city. The meeting was attended by residents and the Trakai town authorities. It is stated in the minutes of the meeting that some residents feared the construction of a large restaurant on the plot of land in issue.
In December 1999 a private person, R.L., who lived in Trakai city, wrote to the Committee of Education, Science and Culture of the Lithuanian Seimas. He submitted that Galina Bogdel, and later her heirs (the applicants), had been attempting to illegally obtain the plot of land situated at 41 Karaimų Street in Trakai since 1992, eventually succeeding in their unlawful endeavours. R.L. argued that the plot was situated immediately in front of Trakai castle in the Trakai Historical National Park and thus could not be privatised.
By a letter of 25 January 2000 the Committee of Education, Science and Culture forwarded the letter to the Ministry of Culture and the State Audit Office (Valstybės kontrolė, hereinafter – “the SAO”), a body whose function is to supervise the lawfulness and effectiveness of management of State property, asking them to investigate the matter.
On 3 July 2000 the SAO adopted decision no. 70, finding that the decisions to lease to Galina Bogdel and subsequently to sell her the plot of land in question (paragraphs 6, 8 and 9 above) were in breach of the legislation on territorial planning, including Article 5 § 4 of the Law on the Protected Territories, the Regulations of the Trakai Historical National Park, approved by Government ruling no. 283 of 22 April 1992, and the Trakai District Council decision of 22 December 1993 (see paragraph 7 above).
The auditors also established that the Trakai municipality’s decision of 28 July 1998 to put the applicants in charge of the project of enlarging their plot of land had breached the Law on the Protection of Immovable Cultural Heritage, in that it had not been agreed upon by the State Department for the Protection of Cultural Heritage.
The SAO invited the HVCA to take appropriate measures in respect of the plot at 41 Karaimų Street “which had been sold to Galina Bogdel in breach of the applicable laws”. The SAO was to be informed of the HVCA’s decision within two months.
The SAO observed that the Trakai municipality officials responsible for the decisions to sell the plot to Galina Bogdel no longer worked in the relevant section. It nevertheless urged the Trakai District Mayor to respect the law when executing territorial planning.
In the meantime another investigation was ongoing. On 3 November another auditing body, this time that of the Trakai District Municipality itself, found that Galina Bogdel had obtained her ownership of the plot of land in question in breach of the laws on the protection of cultural heritage and the relevant territorial planning decisions.
On 24 January 2001 the Trakai District Council annulled the decision of 28 July 1998. The applicants challenged that decision in court.
On 18 April 2001 the HVCA asked the court to annul the decisions of 27 July 1994 and 18 January 1995 permitting Galina Bogdel to lease the plot of land and selling it to her respectively.
On 21 February the HVCA asked the court to annul the sale agreement of 10 February 1995.
Both cases were joined. The applicants then asked the court to dismiss the HVCA’s action, arguing that it was time-barred.
By a decision of 11 July 2005 the Trakai District Court dismissed the applicants’ action and granted all the HVCA’s claims. It found that the time-limit for initiating court proceedings had not been missed by the HVCA. The three-year statutory time-limit had to be calculated from the date the HVCA had learned of or should have learned of the breach of the State’s rights. That date was 3 July 2000, the date when the SAO had concluded that the land had been purchased in breach of the legislation on the protection of cultural heritage, protected territories and territorial planning. The court also noted that in 1995 the land had been sold to Galina Bogdel by a Trakai municipality official. However, in the same year the Lithuanian legislation had been amended and different administrative
On the merits of the case the Trakai District Court found that when concluding the agreements leasing the State-owned plot of land to Galina Bogdel and, subsequently, selling that plot to her, the officials of the Trakai District Municipality had breached the applicable laws and local regulations. Consequently, the court declared those agreements null and void. The court ordered restitution and returned the 134 square meters plot of land to the HVCA. No money was returned to the applicants.
The court also annulled the agreement of 27 July 1998 by which the Trakai District Municipality had entrusted the applicants with coordinating the preparation of the local plan.
The applicants appealed, arguing that more than six years had elapsed between the date the land had been bought and the date when the HVCA had initiated court proceedings for annulment. The applicants also submitted that the purpose of statutory limitation was to guarantee legal certainty. The stability of civil legal relations would be breached if a person could not reasonably expect the status quo to be maintained after the expiry of the limitation period. They also challenged the unilateral restitution. Lastly, the applicants argued that the lower court had erred in interpreting and applying the territorial planning legislation.
By a ruling of 8 November 2005 the Vilnius Regional Court upheld the reasoning of the Trakai District Court. However, it ordered double restitution. The applicants were to be refunded LTL 2,874 – the sum which Galina Bogdel had paid for the plot of land.
The applicants lodged an appeal on points of law. They argued that the lower courts had erred in interpreting the legal norms on the calculation of the limitation period, and the starting date of that term in particular. They did not argue that the courts had acted in a discriminatory fashion when interpreting the public authorities’ civil action, compared with civil actions between private parties. They also submitted that the annulment of the land purchase agreement had breached their right of property, without in any way complaining that the sum they had received in restitution had been too little.
On 10 May 2006 the Supreme Court dismissed the applicants’ appeal, endorsing the reasoning of the lower courts. It observed that at the time when the lease and sale contracts were concluded in 1994-1995, the 1964 Civil Code (Articles 84 and 86) had provided for a three-year statutory time-limit for initiating court proceedings. It had been established in the case that the HVCA had learned of the breaches of the law by those transactions on 3 July 2000, from the report by the SAO. Accordingly, when lodging its claim for the annulment of the land lease decision and the decision to sell the plot of land to Galina Bogdel, the HVCA had not missed the three-year statutory deadline. In the view of the Supreme Court, it would have been unreasonable to calculate the term of statutory limitation from 10 February 1995, the date when the land was sold to Galina Bogdel, because when the counties had been created [in 1995] the administration of each county had not been entrusted with the task of reviewing all the administrative decisions and contracts which the municipalities falling under its competence had adopted or concluded in the past.
As to the applicants’ argument that there were no legal barriers to their owning the plot of land in question, the Supreme Court noted that the Trakai Historical National Park had been created by the Supreme Soviet (Aukščiausioji Taryba, the parliament of the Republic of Lithuania at that time) on 23 April 1992, and by a Government resolution of 22 April 1992 the old town of Trakai had been recognised as an urban heritage site (urbanistinis draustinis). For that reason, on 25 May 1992 the regulations on cultural heritage established that the plot of land situated at 41 Karaimų Street was not to be privatised. Moreover, on 9 November 1993 the Law on the Protected Territories had been passed by the Seimas, providing that land in State-protected areas was not to be sold. Subsequently, by decision no. 395v of 22 December 1993, the Trakai District Council had approved a territorial plan for Trakai old town which specified that the plot of land in question was not to be privatised.
On the basis of the above, the Supreme Court held that the lower courts had been correct in quashing the Trakai municipal authorities’ decisions of 27 July 1994 and 18 January and 10 February 1995 leasing and selling the plot of land to Galina Bogdel. Moreover, the appellate court had been correct in applying the restitution procedure and refunding to the applicants the sum of LTL 2,874.
The Government submitted that after the final decision by the Supreme Court, the applicants’ property rights to the café built on the plot of land situated at 41 Karaimų Street had remained unchanged. Moreover, it can be seen from the documents submitted by the Government that after the Supreme Court’s decision the HVCA still granted the applicants’ request to lease the plot of land in question for a period of eighty-seven years. On 16 November 2006 two lease agreements were thus concluded – 34 square metres were leased to Snežana Bogdel, and 100 square metres were leased to Piotras Bogdel.
Article 47 of the Civil Code of 1964, in force up to 30 June 2001 (“the old Civil Code”), provided that any transaction that failed to meet the requirements of the statutory provisions was null and void. Once a transaction had been declared null and void, each party was bound to return to the other party everything it had obtained as a result of the transaction.
The Civil Code in force since 1 July 2001 (“the new Civil Code”) provides an analogous norm in Article 1.80 §§ 1 and 2.
As regards the statutory limitation period, it begins to run from the date on which the right to bring an action may be enforced. A person has the right to bring an action from the date on which he becomes aware or should have become aware of the violation of his right (Article 86 of the old Civil Code and Article 1.127 § 1 of the new Civil Code). The old Civil Code provided that the general term of limitation was three years (Article 84). Under the new Civil Code, the general term of limitation is ten years (Article 1.125).
As to the date on which the limitation period starts to run when the authorities lodge an action for annulment in order to defend the public interest, the Government referred to the Supreme Court’s ruling of 28 April 2010 in civil case no. 3K-3-143/2010, which stated as follows:
“The case-law of the Supreme Court is coherent to the effect that in a case where a court (of either general or administrative jurisdiction) is approached with the aim of protecting the public interest, the limitation period for submitting a claim starts on the day when the plaintiff was provided with sufficient data to prove that the public interest had been breached.”
The Ruling of the Senate of Judges of the Supreme Court of Lithuania No. 39 of 20 December 2002 “On the Case-law of the Courts of the Republic of Lithuania on the Application of the Legal Norms Governing the Limitation Period” reads as follows:
“5.3.  If the limitation period for bringing a certain claim started running under the Civil Code of 1964 or other laws before 1 July 2001 [the date of entry into force of the new Civil Code], the rules governing the determination of the beginning of the limitation period under the Civil Code of 200[1] are not applicable, because the rules which were in force at the time when the limitation period started running shall be applicable.
In accordance with the general rule governing the determination of the commencement of the statutory limitation period, that period shall start on the day on which the right to bring an action may be enforced, and the right to bring an action arises on the date when a person becomes aware or should have become aware of the violation of his right. Thus under Article 1.127 (Article 86 of the Civil Code of 1964) the limitation period starts running only after a person is subjectively aware, or should be aware, of the violation of his right.
The law links the beginning of the limitation period with the following criteria: the day when the person became aware (subjective criterion) or the day when the person should have become aware (objective criterion). ... Therefore, when deciding the question of the beginning of the limitation period, the court must first of all determine the precise moment of the violation of the law. The day when the person becomes aware of the violation of the law is the day when the person realises in fact that his right or interest protected by law has been violated or disputed. ... In cases where a person claims that he/she did not become aware of the violation of his/her right on the day when it was violated, the court must verify whether there is any evidence indicating the contrary and whether a claimant became aware of the violation of the law no later than would any prudent and careful person in the same situation.”
As regards the rules for establishing the date on which the limitation starts to run in cases where a claim has been submitted by private entities, the applicants submitted that the Supreme Court had held that the limitation period in respect of the invalidity of a contract started on the exact date the parties became aware that the contract had been concluded (decisions in case no. 3K-3-229/2006 of 24 April 2006 and case no. 3K-7-4/2006 of 3 January 2006). They also referred to the Supreme Court’s decision in case no. 3K-3-11/2010 of 5 January 2010, in which it had held that the claimant (a private party) was deemed to have been aware of the infringement of her rights from the date the authorities had adopted an official decision regarding her property rights.
The question of balancing the protection of the public interest and the necessity to ensure the stability of legal relations had also been examined by the Supreme Administrative Court in case no. A575-1576/08 of 26 September 2008. In that case a municipal institution had sold a plot of land designated for agricultural use to a private person in 1994. In 2006 the State authorities discovered that the person had been allowed to purchase the plot in error, for the mere reason that she did not live in the area where the plot was situated, that being a precondition for becoming its owner. The Supreme Administrative Court nevertheless found that, given that that private person had paid taxes on that land and managed it up to 2008, she had a legitimate expectation that her rights to that plot of land would be protected:
“The enlarged chamber of the Supreme Administrative Court in case no. A146-335-2008 of 25 July 2008 has stated that not only prosecutors but also other State bodies or municipalities are responsible for the protection of the public interest. Even though not all of them have competence to bring an action in court to defend the public interest, the principles of the rule of law, cooperation among institutions, effectiveness and other principles of good administration require that, once a breach of the public interest has been established, an institution must inform a prosecutor or another competent body of the breach without undue delay ... The principle of the rule of law requires that the stability of legal relations be preserved. Such stability would be not guaranteed if persons could never be sure that court proceedings for [the annulment] of administrative acts adopted in respect of them could always be initiated. If State or municipal institutions acted with unjustified delay ... it would mean that the opportunity to initiate court proceedings to protect the public interest would become unlimited in time, and such situation is not possible in a State governed by the rule of law. Therefore, a court, having examined the balance to be struck between the values protected and the need to guarantee the stability of legal relations, may refuse to protect the public interest even in those cases where [the institution] has not missed [the statutory time limit] for bringing court proceedings (counting from the moment when the evidence of the breached public interest was gathered or should have been gathered), if a sufficiently long period of time has passed since the administrative legal acts were adopted and legal relations were established.”
The Supreme Administrative Court then established that the authorities had learned that the plot of land had been given to the private person in breach of certain laws in July 2006, but had started court proceedings only in July 2007. In particular, a significant period of time had elapsed between the time when the private person had obtained title to the plot in 1994 and when the State authorities had initiated court proceedings to annul her title. The court therefore refused to protect the public interest in order that the stability of legal relations would be preserved. It also noted that such a conclusion was supported by the practice of the Lithuanian courts, namely, the Supreme Administrative Court’s ruling no. A10-131/2007 of 6 February 2007, where it had held that the time-limit had been missed because eleven years had elapsed since the challenged administrative act had been adopted.
The Law on the Territorial Planning (Teritorijų planavimo įstatymas) provided at the relevant time that territorial plans were public and residents had a right to take part in the public consideration (viešas svarstymas) of new territorial plans (Articles 25-28).
Pursuant to Article 5 of the Law on the Protection of Immovable Cultural Heritage (Nekilnojamųjų kultūros vertybių apsaugos įstatymas), if a decision of a ministry or municipality could have an impact on the protection of immovable cultural heritage and related land, it had to be approved by the Department for the Protection of Cultural Heritage. Decisions without such approval were considered unlawful.
The State Audit Office (Valstybės kontrolė) is the institution tasked with controlling the legality of privatisations of State property as well as the legality of the use of State-owned land and other natural resources (Article 10 §§ 13 and 14 of the Law on the State Audit Office).
In accordance with Article 49 of the Code of Civil Procedure, in the cases provided for by law a prosecutor or other public or municipal authority may submit a civil claim for the protection of a public interest.
The Law on the Protected Territories (Saugomų teritorijų įstatymas) provided at the relevant time that the land in State-protected areas was not subject to sale (Article 5 § 4). In this connection, the Constitutional Court has held that by that prohibition the State sought to ensure the protection and longevity of State-protected areas and recreation zones as areas of particular importance. Accordingly, the land specified may not be transferred to private ownership (ruling of 14 March 2006).
By a resolution no. 283 of 22 April 1992 the Government recognised the old town of Trakai as an urban heritage site (urbanistinis draustinis) in the historical national park of Trakai.
On 9 February 2010 the Constitutional Court gave a Ruling “On the Compliance of Government Resolution no. 912 ‘On the Approval of the Trakai Historical National Park Planning Scheme’ of 6 December 1993 with the Constitution of the Republic of Lithuania”, in which it held as follows:
“7.  On 31 March 1992 (when the accession document was deposited with the Director-General of the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization (UNESCO)), the Republic of Lithuania joined the Convention concerning the Protection of the World Cultural and Natural Heritage ... which was adopted on 16 November 1972 in Paris. In the Republic of Lithuania the Convention came into force on 30 June 1992. In joining the Convention, the Republic of Lithuania undertook the obligation to protect the cultural and natural heritage in its territory and acquired the right to propose properties in its territory for inclusion in the UNESCO World Heritage List.
	In 2002, UNESCO experts, while in Lithuania, looked at the properties of Trakai Historical National Park, which received their favorable evaluation, and recommended that a nomination be prepared in respect of that Lithuanian item for the UNESCO World Heritage List. At the Conference ‘The Trakai Historical National Park – on the UNESCO World Heritage Lists – the Need and Opportunities’, held on 3-4 April 2003 in Lithuania, a resolution was adopted wherein it was held, inter alia, as follows: ‘Taking into consideration the particular value of the landscape as a whole, the Trakai Historical National Park should be nominated for the World Heritage List of Mixed Properties’ and it was decided to ask ‘the Ministry of Culture to approve the inclusion of the Trakai Historical National Park in the World Heritage List of Mixed Properties, to approve a working group, and to delegate to it the task of preparing, in accordance with the terms established, the submission of the Trakai Historical National Park to the World Heritage Committee and to allocate the funds necessary for [that] purpose’.
	On 28 July 2003, upon submission by the Ministry of Culture of the Republic of Lithuania, Trakai Historical National Park was included in a tentative list for [nomination to] the UNESCO World Heritage List (category of properties – mixed).
	8.  Thus, the State of Lithuania has treated and treats Trakai and its environs as a unique complex of landscape created by nature and man, a territory which must be protected and in respect of which a special legal regime must be created; this is a universally acknowledged fact.”
The new Civil Code provides that the State must compensate damage caused by unlawful acts of institutions of public authority, irrespective of the fault of a particular public servant or other employee of a public authority institution (Article 6.271).
The Council of Europe Convention for the Protection of the Architectural Heritage of Europe, ratified by Lithuania on 7 December 1999, reads, inasmuch as relevant, as follows:
“Each Party undertakes:
to take statutory measures to protect the architectural heritage;
within the framework of such measures and by means specific to each State or region, to make provision for the protection of monuments, groups of buildings and sites.”
“Each Party undertakes:
...
to prevent the disfigurement, dilapidation or demolition of protected properties. To this end, each Party undertakes to introduce, if it has not already done so, legislation which:
...
(d)  allows compulsory purchase of a protected property.”