The case originated in five applications (nos. 31039/11, 48511/11, 76810/12, 14618/13 and 13817/14) against the Russian Federation lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by five individuals, whose names, dates of birth and nationality are set out below (“the applicants”).
The applicants’ representatives are listed below. The Russian Government (“the Government”) were represented by Mr G. Matyushkin, the Representative of the Russian Federation at the European Court of Human Rights.
The applicants alleged that they were victims of discrimination on account of their health status in the determination of their applications for residence permits.
On 8 October 2013 and 19 May 2014 the applicants’ complaints of discrimination were communicated to the Government and the remainder of the application was declared inadmissible. The Court put additional questions to the parties about the structural nature of the underlying problem.
The Moldovan and Ukrainian Governments, who had been informed of their right to intervene in the proceedings, under Article 36 § 1 of the Convention, gave no indication that they wished to do so.
The applicant, Mr Mikhail Novruk, is a Moldovan national who was born in 1972. He is represented before the Court by Ms I. Khrunova, a lawyer practising in Kazan.
In 2000, Mr Novruk and Ms O., a Russian national, started living together as a couple in Moldova. In 2001, a boy was born to their union; he acquired Russian nationality by birth. Two years later O. and their son moved to the Primorskiy region of Russia, where most of her family lived. In 2005 Mr Novruk joined them in Russia, and in the same year they married. They divorced in 2008.
In 2009, Mr Novruk met Ms S., a Russian national. In March 2010, he travelled to Moldova to renew his passport, where he discovered that he was HIV-positive. Three weeks later Mr Novruk returned to Vladivostok and on 24 April 2010 he and S. married. S. has a daughter from her previous marriage and she is also a foster parent to nine orphaned children, some of whom are HIV-positive.
In June 2010 Mr Novruk applied to the Primorskiy Region Federal Migration Service for a temporary residence permit. By a letter of 8 July 2010 he was informed that his application was refused by reference to section 7 § 1 (13) of the Foreign Nationals Act, which restricted the issue of residence permits to foreign nationals who could show that they were HIVnegative.
On 4 October 2010 the Sovetskiy District Court of Vladivostok, dismissed a challenge by the applicant to that decision, finding in particular that the Federal Migration Service had been required by law to reject his application for a residence permit. On 16 November 2010 the Primorskiy Regional Court upheld that judgment on appeal.
The applicant Ms Anna Viktorovna Kravchenko is a Ukrainian national who was born in 1982. She is represented before the Court by Ms N. Yermolayeva, a lawyer practising in Moscow.
In 2003, Ms Kravchenko married Mr D., a Russian national. They started living in Moscow. During her pregnancy she was diagnosed as HIVpositive. On 4 April 2003 her son F. was born. He acquired Russian nationality by birth.
In 2009, Ms Kravchenko applied for a temporary residence permit. By a letter of 25 May 2009 the Federal Migration Service refused her application by reference to section 7 § 1 (13) of the Foreign Nationals Act and ordered her to leave Russia within fifteen days or face deportation. Ms Kravchenko challenged the refusal with the courts.
On 23 September 2009 the Zamoskvoretskiy District Court, Moscow, found for Ms Kravchenko, noting in particular that the Migration Service had decided on her application without taking into account that her minor child and husband were both Russian nationals. It directed the Migration Service to reconsider the application.
Further to the District Court’s decision, Ms Kravchenko lodged a new application for a residence permit. On 15 January 2010 the Migration Service rejected it, referring to the same provision of the Foreign Nationals Act.
Ms Kravchenko applied again for a judicial review. By a judgment of 3 September 2010, the Zamoskvoretskiy District Court of Moscow granted a stay of enforcement of the Migration Service decision and ordered it to reconsider the matter in the light of the Constitutional Court’s decision of 12 May 2006 and the Convention principles. Ms Kravchenko appealed; she submitted that the District Court should have ruled that the Migration Service refusal had been unlawful.
On 8 February 2011 the Moscow City Court dismissed Ms Kravchenko’s appeal against the District Court’s judgment, finding that “there were no grounds to vary the judgment, because the Moscow division of the Federal Migration Service had actually complied with it”.
The applicant, Mr Roman Khalupa, is a Moldovan national who was born in 1974. He was granted legal aid and is represented before the Court by Mr D. Bartenev, a lawyer practising in St Petersburg.
In 2005, Mr Khalupa married Ms E., a Russian national. Their children, a girl A. and a boy B., were born in 2005 and 2008 respectively. The family were living in St Petersburg.
In early 2008 Mr Khalupa took a blood test with a view to obtaining a health certificate to support his application for a temporary residence permit. He was found to be HIV-positive. The hospital reported the results of his test to the St Petersburg division of the Federal Migration Service, which issued a decision of 4 June 2008 on the undesirability of Mr Khalupa’s stay in Russia because he would pose a “real threat to public health”. On 17 June 2008 the director of the Federal Migration Service ratified that decision.
On 1 August 2008 the decision was notified to Mr Khalupa; he left Russia three days later, in compliance with the law. He took up residence in Dubossary in the “Moldavian Republic of Transdniestria”.
On the day following the pronouncement of the Kiyutin v. Russia judgment (no. 2700/10, ECHR 2011), Ms E., acting on Mr Khalupa’s behalf, applied to the St Petersburg division of the Federal Migration Service, asking it to set aside the decision by which his presence in Russia had been pronounced undesirable. She submitted medical documents showing that Mr Khalupa posed no danger to public health because he was receiving appropriate treatment. Her request was forwarded to the legal department of the Federal Migration Service for review. In a letter of 5 May 2011 addressed to the deputy director of the visas and registration department of the Federal Migration Service, the director of the legal department acknowledged that the decision of 4 June 2008 had not taken fully into account Mr Khalupa’s family ties in Russia. Nevertheless, on 12 September 2011 the deputy director of the St Petersburg division of the Federal Migration Service informed Mr Khalupa and Ms E. that their applications for review of the decision of 4 June 2008 had been refused. His letter did not specify the grounds for refusing the request.
Mr Khalupa complained to court. On 30 January 2012 the Basmannyy District Court of Moscow dismissed his complaint, finding firstly that his rights and freedoms had not been interfered with, and secondly that the director of the Federal Migration Service was not empowered to review or set aside a decision by which an individual’s presence in Russia had been declared undesirable. That judgment was upheld on appeal on 16 May 2012 by the Moscow City Court. On 12 December 2012 the Presidium of the City Court rejected Mr Khalupa’s cassation appeal.
Mr Khalupa also challenged the compatibility of section 25.10 of the Entry and Exit Procedures Act with the Constitution, in that it allowed an executive agency to pronounce his presence undesirable solely because of his HIV-positive status. By decision no. 902-O of 4 June 2013, the Constitutional Court declared his challenge inadmissible, finding that the impugned section was needed for the protection of public health from infectious diseases, including HIV. The Constitutional Court reiterated that its decision of 12 May 2006 (cited in paragraph 60 below) remained valid and applicable, and that the decision pronouncing someone’s presence undesirable must take full account of humanitarian considerations and the factual circumstances of each case, including the family links and state of health of the individual concerned.
On 14 January 2014 Mr Khalupa’s representative asked the Consumer Protection Authority to review the undesirability decision and to allow him to visit his children in Russia. By a letter of 13 February 2014 the deputy head of the CPA replied that it did not have the authority to reverse a decision issued by the Federal Migration Service.
The applicant, Ms Irina Grigoryevna Ostrovskaya, was born in 1953 in the Kurgan Region of the Russian Soviet Federal Socialist Republic of the USSR. She is represented before the Court by Ms O. Leonova, a lawyer practising in Samara.
In 1966 her parents took Ms Ostrovskaya and her sister to live in the Uzbek Soviet Socialist Republic of the USSR. In 1972 Ms Ostrovskaya got married and gave birth to a boy. Two years later her sister also married and moved back to Russia. Following the collapse of the USSR, Ms Ostrovskaya acquired Uzbek nationality.
After the death of her parents and husband and her son’s move to Russia in 2006, Ms Ostrovskaya remained in Uzbekistan alone. In September 2011 she decided to move to Russia to share the flat occupied by her son’s and her sister’s families. Ms Ostrovksaya’s sister and her husband are Russian nationals; her son and his family are Uzbek nationals with valid Russian residence permits.
In November 2011 Ms Ostrovskaya applied for a temporary residence permit. During a medical examination she tested HIV-positive.
By decision of 17 January 2012, the Samara division of the Federal Migration Service refused her application for residence permit by reference to section 7 § 1 (13) of the Foreign Nationals Act, and informed her accordingly. On 27 March 2012 a further notification to the same effect was sent by the Federal Migration Service.
By a letter of 9 June 2012 the Samara division of the Consumer Protection Authority notified Ms Ostrovskaya that she should leave Russia by 30 June 2012 or face deportation. The letter indicated that on 30 May 2012 the director of the Federal Consumer Protection Authority determined that her presence on Russian territory was undesirable by virtue of section 25.10 of the Entry and Exit Procedures Act.
On 26 June 2012 Ms Ostrovskaya complained to court, relying on humanitarian grounds in her claim that she should be allowed to stay in Russia. By a judgment of 23 July 2012, upheld on appeal on 17 September 2012, the Samara District and Regional Courts held that the decision to refuse her a residence permit had been lawfully given by the Migration Service within its jurisdiction and in compliance with the Foreign Nationals Act and its internal regulations. The District Court declared that it would not take any humanitarian considerations into account because Ms Ostrovskaya had missed the three-month time-limit for submitting her claim, and she had a receipt of notification as early as 16 February 2012. The undesirability decision had been issued by the Federal Consumer Protection Authority rather than by its Samara division; since Ms Ostrovskaya had designated the latter, but not the former, as the defendant in her claim, the courts refused to review what they described as an “actually non-existent decision”.
On 6 November 2012 the Regional Court refused her leave to appeal to a cassation instance.
The applicant, Mr V.V., is a national of Kazakhstan who was born in 1983 and lives in Yekaterinburg. The Court granted the applicant’s request for his identity not to be disclosed to the public (Rule 47 § 4).
V.V. came to Russia in 2006 to study at a medical college. Since 23 November 2007 he has been living with his partner Mr X, who also represented him in the present proceedings before the Court. They have maintained a common household, shared expenses and travelled together. They have met each other’s parents. V.V. submitted copies of travel documents and family photographs.
On 11 March 2012 V.V. applied to the Sverdlovsk division of the Federal Migration Service for a temporary residence permit. He committed himself to producing an HIV certificate within thirty days. On 16 April 2012 the Sverdlovsk Regional Centre for Aids Prevention and Treatment certified him to be HIV-positive.
On 28 April 2012 the Federal Migration Service refused his application for a residence permit by reference to section 7 § 1 (13) of the Foreign Nationals Act. V.V. challenged the refusal before a court.
On 26 July 2012 the Verkh-Isetskiy District Court of Yekaterinburg upheld the refusal, finding in particular that V.V.’s HIV status amounted to an “actual threat to the health of the Russian population” and that V.V.’s living with a same-sex partner was not equivalent to having a family.
On 21 November 2012 the Sverdlovsk Regional Court heard an appeal by V.V. against the District Court’s decision and, referring in particular to the Kiyutin judgment, held that V.V.’s HIV-positive status could not on its own be a ground for a restriction on his rights. Since the Migration Service did not cite any other grounds in its decision, the Regional Court enjoined it to carry out a new assessment of the application for a residence permit. The judgment became final and enforceable.
In the meantime, on 24 April 2012 the Sverdlovsk division of the Consumer Protection Authority forwarded a copy of V.V.’s diagnosis to the Federal Consumer Protection Authority, with a view to pronouncing his presence in Russia undesirable. On 16 November 2012 the federal authority asked the regional division to re-administer the HIV test. On 25 December 2012 V.V. again tested positive for HIV.
On 15 March 2013 the Federal Consumer Protection Authority pronounced V.V.’s presence in Russia undesirable in accordance with section 25.10 of the Entry and Exit Procedures Act. The decision stated that V.V. had been infected with HIV and had avoided treatment. It cited in evidence medical certificates dated 16 April and 25 December 2012. V.V.’s representative challenged the decision before a court.
On 26 April 2013 V.V. travelled from Russia to Kazakhstan. On his way back two days later, he was refused entry into Russia by reference to that decision.
On 30 May 2013 the Verkh-Isetskiy District Court allowed the challenge, finding that the undesirability decision had been unlawful because it did not refer to any grounds other than V.V.’s HIV-positive status. It also granted a stay of enforcement of that decision, enabling V.V. to return to Russia, which he did.
However, on 13 August 2013 the Sverdlovsk Regional Court reversed the District Court’s decision and dismissed the claim. It held that the ban against V.V. had been put in place not only because he was infected with HIV but also because he had refused to give contact details of his former partners during an “epidemiological investigation of the HIV infection”, that is when filling out a questionnaire at the hospital. The Regional Court also examined V.V.’s personal circumstances and found that he was single, that his next of kin lived in Kazakhstan, that he did not have a family relationship with any Russian nationals, that he lived in a student hostel rather than in a rented flat, and that he had no resources to pay for HIV treatment.
On 19 February 2014 the Sverdlovsk Regional Court refused leave to appeal to the cassation instance. It found in particular:
“The facts which, in the claimant’s view, are of legal significance but which the appeal court failed to take into account, including ... his voluntary compliance with the obligation to inform his former partners about a possible HIV infection, his being in a steady sexual relationship ... cannot be established on the basis of the claimant’s and his representative’s statements alone.
The court did not see any evidence of any social links the claimant has in the Russian Federation. The claimant and his representative merely confirmed that they have a sexual relationship, which does not equate to social links.
A threat to public health ... could result from the fact that the claimant has a registered place of residence and actually lives in a hostel, which is a public place; this fact alone put the health of the other residents of the dormitory at risk because the claimant may use the same public facilities ...”
On 1 April 2014 a judge of the Supreme Court refused him leave to appeal to the Supreme Court.
After notice of the case had been given to the Government, on 7 July 2014 V.V. informed the Court that the Government Representative’s office had forwarded the case materials to the Prosecutor General’s Office with a request to inquire whether or not V.V. was lawfully present in Russia, whether or not he was continuing his studies, and whether his representative before the Court Mr X could have been his partner. The request contained full personal details of V.V. The Prosecutor General sent the request to the local prosecutor’s office in Yekaterinburg. As it happened, Mr X was a former employee in that prosecutor’s office. A prosecutor summonsed Mr X for an interview and put questions about the nature of his relationship with V.V., whether V.V. was still present in Russia, and where they lived. Law-enforcement officers also visited their neighbours and asked them how long V.V. and Mr X had lived together and whether they had girlfriends.
The Government submitted a copy of a statement from a prosecutor in charge of human rights and federal law compliance, dated 6 August 2014, from which it appears that on 1 June 2014 Mr X had been asked to attend the Sverdlovsk regional prosecutor’s office in his capacity as V.V.’s representative. He was interviewed about “the exercise by V.V. of his labour, family and migration rights”. The interview was conducted “tactfully” (в корректной форме), and no pressure was put on him. The police and migration authorities had established that no one lived at the address which V.V. had listed as his registered place of residence. The Government also produced a copy of the statement signed by Mr X on 1 June 2014. Mr X clarified that V. had been living in a stable same-sex relationship since 2007. He refused to name V.’s partner or to say whether he was V.’s partner: in his capacity as V.’s representative he was not required to disclose any information about his own private life. He also briefly described V.’s education, employment and migration status.
Section 11(2) provides that foreign nationals and stateless persons who are in Russian territory are to be deported once it is discovered that they are HIV-positive. For the procedure, see paragraphs 53-54 below.
Section 6(8) and Government Resolution no. 789 of 1 November 2002 define the list of documents that must be enclosed with an application for a residence permit. Among other documents, an applicant must produce a medical certificate showing that he or she is not HIV-positive.
Section 7 contains the list of grounds for refusing a temporary residence permit or for cancelling a previously issued residence permit. In particular, an application for a residence permit will be refused if the foreigner is a drug abuser or is unable to produce a certificate showing that he or she is not HIV-positive (section 7(1)(13)).
Section 8(3.1)-(3.3) – in force since 2 May 2014 – establishes that a non-national who is a habitual Russian speaker (носитель русского языка) and whose direct ancestors lived within the state borders of modern-day Russia in the Russian Federation, the USSR or the Russian Empire, is eligible ipso facto for a three-year residence permit and a simplified naturalisation procedure (see also section 14(2.1) of the Russian Nationality Act, no. 62-FZ of 31 May 2002).
A competent authority may issue a decision that a foreign national’s presence on Russian territory is undesirable. Such a decision may be issued if a foreign national is unlawfully residing on Russian territory or if his or her residence is lawful but creates a real threat to, in particular, public order or health, etc. If such a decision has been taken, the foreign national has to leave Russia or will otherwise be deported. That decision also forms the legal basis for subsequent refusal of re-entry into Russia (section 25.10).
The list of authorities competent to take such a decision was approved by Government resolution no. 199 of 7 April 2003. It included the Ministry of the Interior, the Federal Migration Service, the Consumer Protection Authority, and eight other executive agencies.
A foreign national shall be refused entry into Russia if, in particular, a competent authority issues a decision that his or her presence on Russian territory is undesirable (section 27 § 7).
Article 6.1 provides that an HIV-positive individual who refuses to disclose the source of infection or identify the individuals with whom he or she had contacts that created the risk of transmission may be fined between 500 and 1,000 Russian roubles (RUB).
On 14 September 2010 the Federal Authority for Consumer Protection and Supervision of Human Well-being, headed by the Chief Sanitary Inspector of Russia, by Order no. 336, approved Guidance on the procedure for preparation, submission and examination of materials leading to a decision on undesirability of the presence of a foreign national or stateless person in Russia. The Guidance established that such a decision must be taken by the head of the Consumer Protection Authority or his deputy (section 2) on the proposal of a regional division of the Consumer Protection Authority (section 3).
On 13 February 2012 the Chief Sanitary Inspector of Russia issued a resolution (no. 16) on urgent measures required for countering the spread of HIV infection in Russia. He noted, in particular, as follows:
“In 2011 ... 1,070,887 foreign nationals and stateless persons were tested for communicable diseases. 6,114 persons were diagnosed with diseases dangerous to the public, which is the basis for issuing a decision on the undesirability of their presence in Russia. Of those, 1,215 persons were HIV-positive ...
In 2011, the Russian Consumer Protection Authority issued 1,327 decisions declaring the presence of foreign nationals from thirty-eight countries undesirable in the Russian Federation. 727 migrants left Russia or were deported ...
A low rate of detection of sexually transmitted diseases among migrants in Vladimir, Tver, Leningrad, Pskov, Samara, Kirov, Pensa ... Regions is a reason for concern. Such a low rate does not correspond to the statistical average and is indicative of a poorly organised regime of medical testing of foreign nationals ...”
According to the report of the conference on the epidemiological monitoring of the measures that were deployed in 2012 for the prevention, detection and treatment of HIV infection and B- and C-type hepatitis (Suzdal, 11-14 March 2013), in 2012 a further 1,357,804 foreign nationals were tested for communicable diseases, of whom 1,403 tested HIVpositive.
On 12 May 2006 the Constitutional Court rejected a constitutional complaint introduced by an HIV-positive Ukrainian national, who lived in Russia with his Russian wife and daughter (decision no. 155O). The Constitutional Court held that section 11(2) of the HIV Prevention Act and section 7(1)(13) of the Foreign Nationals Act were compatible with the Russian Constitution, as the restriction on temporary residence of HIVpositive foreign nationals had been imposed by the legislature for the protection of constitutional values, the main one being public health. The Constitutional Court emphasised the principle of proportionality in respect of the measures adopted in pursuance of constitutional aims, and noted that the law-enforcement authorities and courts may – on the basis of humanitarian considerations – take into account the family situation, the state of health of the HIV-positive foreign national or stateless person, and other exceptional but meritorious circumstances in determining whether the person should be granted temporary residence in the Russian territory.
On 12 March 2015 the Constitutional Court examined a new challenge to section 11(2) of the HIV Prevention Act, section 7(1)(13) of the Foreign Nationals Act, and section 25.10 of the Entry and Exit Procedures Act. The challenge was brought by two nationals of Ukraine and one of Moldova and their Russian spouses. The non-Russian complainants had either been refused a residence permit or declared undesirable in Russia on account of their HIV-positive status. The Constitution Court held that the migration laws can lawfully restrict access to Russia by non-Russian nationals whose medical condition may jeopardise public health and pose a threat to national security. It acknowledged the contemporary medical consensus that HIV does not pose a threat to public health because it is not transmitted merely by the presence of the infected individual in the country or through casual contact, airborne particles, food or water. The Constitutional Court noted, on the strength of evidence submitted by the complainants, that law-enforcement authorities did not systematically take into account its position in the matter, as expressed in its previous decisions of 12 May 2006 and 4 June 2013 (see paragraph 24 above). A continued failure to interpret and apply the provisions in accordance with the Constitutional Court’s pronouncements can be a reason for declaring them incompatible with the Constitution. The Constitutional Court held as follows:
“1.  To declare that the closely related provisions of section 25.10 of the Entry and Exit Procedures Act, section 11(2) of the HIV Prevention Act, and section 7(1)(13) of the Foreign Nationals Act are incompatible with the Russian Constitution ... in so far as they allow [the executive authorities] to declare undesirable the presence of a foreign national or a stateless person whose family permanently resides in Russia, to issue a deportation order or an entry ban, to refuse him a residence permit or to cancel a previously issued residence permit solely because that person is HIV-positive, provided that the person has complied with the legal requirements on HIV-positive individuals relating to the prevention of spreading the infection, and provided that no other circumstances would call for such restrictions.
The federal legislation should – in the light of the requirements of the Russian Constitution and the position of the Constitutional Court, as expressed in the present judgment – introduce the necessary amendments into the existing corpus of laws which would clarify the grounds and the procedure for making decisions relating to the right of HIV-positive foreign nationals or stateless persons to stay and to live in the Russian Federation.”
Pending such amendments, the Constitutional Court directed that the executive and judicial authorities be guided by the position it had formulated in the judgment.
On 20 August 2015 the Russian Government introduced a draft law into the State Duma (registered under number 866379-6). The draft law purports to bring section 11(2) of the HIV Prevention Act, sections 25.10 and 27 of the Entry and Exit Procedures Act, and section 7 (1) of the Foreign Nationals Act into conformity with the Constitutional Court’s judgment of 12 March 2015 (see paragraph 61 above). It provides that HIVpositive non-nationals who have not breached the Russian legislation on the prevention of spreading of the HIV infection and whose spouse, parents or children are Russian or permanently resident in Russia shall not be denied entry into Russia, deported, pronounced undesirable on Russian territory or required to enclose an HIV-negative certificate with their application for residence permit. The Government also directs that the Federal Migration Service should revise their procedure for assessing applications for residence permits within three months of the enactment of the amendments.
In May 2009 the Joint United Nations Programme on HIV and AIDS (UNAIDS) published the survey “Mapping of restrictions on the entry, stay and residence of people living with HIV”. The latest version of the survey, updated in September 2015, is available on its website.
According to the survey, as of September 2015, 142 countries, territories and areas worldwide impose no HIV-specific restrictions or conditions on entry, stay or residence. Thirty-five countries and territories imposed some form of restriction based on HIV status. Seventeen countries (Bahrain, Brunei, North Korea, Egypt, Iraq, Jordan, Kuwait, Malaysia, Oman, Qatar, Russia, Saudi Arabia, Singapore, Sudan, Syria, United Arab Emirates, and Yemen) deport individuals once their HIV-positive status is discovered.
Within the European region, two member States of the Council of Europe lifted HIV-related travel and residence restrictions in the period after the Kiyutin judgment: Armenia did so in July 2011 and Moldova in June 2012. In 2013 and 2015, Andorra and Slovakia, which are member States, and Belarus, which is a European non-member State, confirmed to UNAIDS that they applied no restrictions on the entry, stay and residence for people living with HIV.
In the context of the execution of the Kiyutin v. Russia judgment, on 6 February 2012 the Russian Government submitted a report and an action plan (DH-DD(2012)160E). The report indicated that the text of the judgment was translated into Russian and disseminated among lawenforcement officials and courts, and that no further action was necessary, for the following reasons:
“... the decision of 12 May 2006 by the Constitutional Court of the Russian Federation ... does not exclude that law-enforcement authorities and national courts, by reference to humanitarian considerations, taking into account the marital status, the health status of the HIV-positive individual and other important considerations for the resolution of the issue whether the deportation of that person from the Russian Federation is necessary ...
Therefore, the reading of section 7 § 1 (13) of the Foreign Nationals Act does not exclude the possibility to allow an HIV-positive foreign national to enter and to reside on Russian territory on account of the concrete circumstances of the case and with regard to Article 8 and other provisions of the Convention ...
The legal position of the Constitutional Court, as expressed in the above decision ... is obligatory in the entire territory of the Russian Federation for legislative, executive and judicial authorities, local government bodies, State officials, etc ...
In consideration of the foregoing, the competent State bodies reached the conclusion that it is not necessary to vary the currently existing legislation of the Russian Federation in connection with the entry into force of the Kiyutin v. Russia judgment.
Therefore, the violation of the Convention provisions established in the European Court’s judgment Kiyutin v. Russia resulted from subjective circumstances, such as violations by the concrete State bodies and national courts which rejected the application for a residence permit without taking into account the requirements of the Russian legislation or the interpretation given by the Constitutional Court ...”
On 20 December 2012 the Russian Government submitted a summary of more than twenty-five cases which were heard by Russian courts in 2011 and 2012 and which concerned challenges brought by individual claimants against the Migration Service decisions refusing them residence permits on account of their HIV-positive status (DHDD(2013)273). In the majority of those cases the courts overturned either the Migration Service or the lower courts’ decisions and found in favour of the claimants, noting in particular their family ties in Russia and state of health. In the other cases the courts upheld the refusal, finding that the claimant had not established any lasting ties in Russia.