The case originated in an application (no. 2737/04) against the  lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by two Russian nationals, Mr Aleksandr Vladimirovich Avdeyev and Mr Yevgeniy Nikolayevich Veryayev (“the applicants”), on 30 November 2003.
The applicants, who had been granted legal aid, were represented by Ms E. Polyutskaya and Ms N. Vedmenskaya, lawyers practising in . The Russian Government (“the Government”) were represented Mr P. Laptev and Mrs V. Milinchuk, former Representatives of the  at the European Court of Human Rights.
The applicants alleged, in particular, that they had been detained unlawfully for a long time without any valid reasons.
On 14 November 2006 the President of the First Section decided to give notice of the application to the Government. It was also decided to examine the merits of the application at the same time as its admissibility (Article 29 § 3).
The Government objected to the joint examination of the admissibility and merits of the application. Having examined the Government’s objection, the Court dismissed it.
The applicants were born in 1975 and 1971, respectively, and live in the town of  in the Ryazan Region.
On 12 July 2001 the brother of the first applicant had a fist fight with Mr K. Several persons, including Mr L., witnessed the fight and were brought to the Sasovo District police station for questioning. The applicants, investigators in the Sasovo District Police Department at the material time, invited Mr L. into an office and urged him to change his statements about the fight. In response to Mr L.’s refusal, the applicants, who were intoxicated, beat him up. The first applicant dragged Mr L. outdoors, forced him into a car, drove him to a cemetery and left him there.
Criminal proceedings were instituted against the applicants upon Mr L.’s complaints. They were charged with aggravated abuse of position. The applicants were not remanded in custody as they had given written undertakings not to leave the town.
On 9 April 2003 the Sasovo District Court of the Ryazan Region found the applicants guilty as charged and sentenced the first applicant to three years and six months’ imprisonment and the second applicant to three years’ imprisonment. The applicants were taken into custody in the courtroom.
On 5 June 2003 the , acting on appeal, quashed the judgment of 9 April 2003, remitted the case for a fresh examination and ordered, without providing any reasoning or indicating any legal grounds, that the applicants should remain in custody. The decision of 5 June 2003 was not amenable to appeal.
On 10 July 2003 the Sasovo District Court fixed the first trial hearing for 18 July 2003 and ordered that the measure of restraint applied to the applicants should “remain unchanged”. No reasons for the extension were given. At the same time the District Court indicated that the decision could be appealed against to the  within ten days. The applicants did not appeal.
The applicants’ lawyers asked the District Court to release the applicants on their own recognisance. Both requests were dismissed, on 11 and 14 July 2003, respectively, because the District Court had already examined the detention matter on 10 July 2003. The lawyers did not appeal against the decisions.
On 25 July 2003 the Sasovo District Court examined the applicants’ requests for release and dismissed them by two separate identically worded decisions. In particular, the District Court held that the applicants were charged with serious criminal offences and could influence witnesses. The decisions were amenable to appeal, however, no appeal followed.
On 8 October 2003 the District Court extended the applicants’ detention on remand until 9 January 2004. It held that the applicants had committed a serous criminal offence and, if released, might obstruct justice. The District Court also mentioned that it had ordered an expert examination which had not yet been completed.
The applicants appealed, arguing that their conviction had been quashed and there were no further grounds to keep them in custody. They noted that they had children, had permanent places of residence and did not have any criminal record.
On 30 October 2003 the  upheld the decision of 8 October 2003, noting that the detention had been lawfully extended with reference to the seriousness of the charge against the applicants.
On 25 December 2003 the Sasovo District Court, by two separate similarly worded decisions, extended the applicants’ detention for an additional three months, that is, until 9 April 2004. The District Court listed the following grounds for the extension: the gravity of the charge against the applicants, the fact that not all witnesses had yet been heard in open court, the likelihood that the applicants might try to influence the victim and witnesses and to prevent the establishment of the truth in the case.
The applicants’ lawyers appealed, relying on Article 5 of the Convention and arguing that, when extending the applicants’ detention, the District Court had not taken into consideration their personal circumstances: that Sasovo was their permanent place of residence, that they needed to take care of small children, etc. They further submitted that there was no evidence of the alleged likelihood that the applicants would obstruct the course of justice. They had never attempted to influence the victim or witnesses and had never tried to interfere with the course of the investigation or judicial proceedings.
On 20 January 2004 the  upheld the decisions of 25 December 2003, endorsing the reasons given by the District Court.
On 12 February 2004 the Sasovo District Court found the applicants guilty of aggravated abuse of position and sentenced them to three years and five months’ and three years’ imprisonment, respectively.
On 1 April 2004 the  upheld the conviction.
Until 1 July 2002 matters of criminal law were governed by the Code of Criminal Procedure of the  (Law of 27 October 1960, “the old CCrP”). From 1 July 2002 the old CCrP was replaced by the Code of Criminal Procedure of the  (Law no. 174-FZ of 18 December 2001, “the new CCrP”).
“Preventive measures” or “measures of restraint” include an undertaking not to leave a town or region, a personal guarantee, bail and remand in custody (Article 98 of the new CCrP).
The Russian Constitution of 12 December 1993 provides that a judicial decision is required before a defendant can be detained or his or her detention extended (Article 22).
The new CCrP requires a judicial decision by a district or town court on a reasoned request by a prosecutor, supported by appropriate evidence (Article 108 §§ 1, 3-6).
When deciding whether to remand an accused in custody, the competent authority is required to consider whether there are “sufficient grounds to believe” that he or she would abscond during the investigation or trial or obstruct the establishment of the truth or reoffend (Article 97 § 1 of the new CCrP). It must also take into account the gravity of the charge, information on the accused’s character, his or her profession, age, state of health, family status and other circumstances (Article 99 of the new CCrP). A defendant should not be remanded in custody if a less severe preventive measure is available.
The Code makes a distinction between two types of remand in custody: the first being “during investigation”, that is, while a competent agency – the police or a prosecutor’s office – is investigating the case, and the second being “before the court” (or “during trial proceedings”), at the judicial stage. Although there is no difference in practice between them (the detainee is held in the same detention facility), the calculation of the time-limits is different.
After arrest the suspect is placed in custody “during investigation”. The maximum permitted period of detention “during investigation” is two months but this can be extended for up to eighteen months in “exceptional circumstances”. Extensions are to be authorised by judicial decisions, taken by courts at ascending levels. No extension of detention “during investigation” beyond eighteen months is possible (Article 109 § 4 of the new CCrP).
The period of detention “during investigation” is calculated up to the day when the prosecutor sends the case to the trial court (Article 109 § 9 of the new CCrP).
Access to the materials in the file is to be granted no later than one month before the expiry of the authorised detention period (Article 109 § 5 of the new CCrP). If the defendant needs more time to study the case file, a judge, on a request by a prosecutor, may grant an extension of the detention until such time as the file has been read in full and the case sent for trial (Article 109 § 8 (1) of the new CCrP).
From the date the prosecutor refers the case to the trial court, the defendant’s detention is classified as “before the court” (or “during judicial proceedings”).
The new CCrP provides that the term of detention “during judicial proceedings” is calculated from the date the court received the file up to the date on which the judgment is given. The period of detention “during judicial proceedings” may not normally exceed six months, but if the case concerns serious or particularly serious criminal offences, the trial court may approve one or more extensions of no longer than three months each (Article 255 §§ 2 and 3).
The new CCrP empowers the judge, within fourteen days of receipt of the case file, (1) to refer the case to a competent court; (2) to fix a date for a preliminary hearing; or (3) to fix a trial date (Article 227). In the latter case, the trial proceedings must begin no later than fourteen days after the judge has fixed the trial date (Article 233 § 1 of the new CCrP). There are no restrictions on fixing the date of a preliminary hearing.
The duration of the entire trial proceedings is not limited in time.
The new CCrP provides that the appeal court must start the examination of the appeal no later than one month after it is lodged (Article 374).