The case originated in an application (no. 52690/99) against the  lodged with the European Commission of Human Rights (“the Commission”) under former Article 25 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Polish national, Mr Lech Majewski (“the applicant”), on 18 June 1998.
The Polish Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent Mr. J. Wołąsiewicz of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs.
On 24 August 2004 the Court declared the application partly inadmissible and decided to communicate the complaint concerning the length of the proceedings to the Government. Applying Article 29 § 3 of the Convention, it decided to rule on the admissibility and merits of the application at the same time.
The applicant was born in 1955 and lives in .
On 10 November 1990 the applicant lodged a civil action for compensation against the State Treasury - the Białystok Remand Centre with the Białystok District Court (Sąd Rejonowy). He alleged that upon his arrival in the Białystok Remand Centre, on 14 December 1989, he had been beaten and insulted by the prison guards and had subsequently not received proper medical care. The applicant claimed that in consequence of the excessive use of force against him he had sustained a spinal injury and suffered permanent disability.
At the first hearing held on 20 December 1990 the court appointed a lawyer under a legal aid scheme for the applicant and ordered a copy of the casefile concerning the criminal investigation concerning the events of December 1989.
On 31 January 1991 the court held a hearing at which the applicant’s courtappointed lawyer, Mr B.Z., was present. The court stayed the proceedings.
On 17 July 1992 the Białystok District Court resumed the proceedings. However, on 12 August 1992 it decided to stay them again in view of the fact that the criminal proceedings against the Governor of the Białystok Remand Centre were pending.
On 29 May 1995 the Białystok District Court resumed the proceedings. The court further decided that the  (Sąd Wojewódzki) was competent to deal with the case.
On 18 January 1996 the  held the first hearing. In January 1997 the applicant was heard before the Trzcianka District Court. Between 18 September and 18 November 1997 the trial court held four hearings.
On 27 November 1997 the  gave judgment. It partly allowed the applicant’s action. The court acknowledged that the applicant had suffered moral damage as a result of the illegal actions of the state agents and awarded him compensation. The  dismissed the applicant’s allegations that the incident had caused a spinal injury and dismissed the remainder of his claims for compensation.
On 7 May 1998 the Białystok Court of Appeal (Sąd Apelacyjny) held a hearing and examined the appeal lodged by the State Treasury. The appellate court gave judgment in which it allowed the State Treasury’s appeal, quashed the impugned judgment, and dismissed the applicant’s action.
Subsequently, the applicant’s court-appointed lawyer refused to lodge a cassation appeal against this judgment on his behalf as he apparently found no legal grounds for it.
On 28 January 1991 the applicant lodged a civil action for compensation against the State Treasury- Szczecin Remand Centre with the  (Sąd Wojewódzki). He claimed PLN 2,500 in compensation for an accident which had occurred in 1983, during his detention in the Szczecin Remand Centre. The applicant further complained that the medical treatment he had received at the material time had been inadequate.
On 11 March 1994 the trial court held the first hearing. The applicant, who had been in detention since 1977, was not present at the hearing because he had failed to return to prison from leave. At that hearing, the court stayed the proceedings on the grounds that the applicant’s address could not be established.
On 20 November 2000 the  resumed the proceedings.
On 24 April 2001 the trial court held a hearing at which it ordered that an expert opinion be obtained. On 13 December 2001 the court held a second hearing at which it decided that the applicant would be heard by another court since he had been transferred to a different prison. On 11 February 2002 the applicant was heard before the Trzcianka District Court. On 26 March and 7 May 2002 the  held hearings.
On 24 May 2002 the trial court gave judgment. It dismissed the applicant’s action. The applicant’s court-appointed lawyer lodged an appeal against that judgment.
On 13 November 2002 the Poznań Court of Appeal allowed his appeal, quashed the ’s judgment and remitted the case to the firstinstance court.
On 9 June 2004 the Szczecin District Court held a hearing at which it heard the applicant.
On 21 June 2004 the court, sitting in camera, decided that an expert opinion be prepared. The expert opinion was submitted to the trial court on 27 October 2004.
On 3 November 2004 the applicant lodged with the  a complaint alleging that his right to have his case examined within a reasonable time had been breached. He submitted that he had lodged a civil action on 28 January 1991 and despite the fact that he had not contributed to their length, the proceedings were still pending before the District Court. The applicant relied on the 2004 Act on complaints about a breach of the right to a trial within a reasonable time. At that time, the proceedings were pending before the District Court following the remittal of the case by the appellate court in 2002. According to the 2004 Act the Regional Court – being the court above the one conducting the impugned proceedings - was competent to examine the complaint (Section 4 § 1 of the 2004 Act, see the domestic law part below).
On 7 January 2005 the  dismissed his complaint. The court examined only the course of the proceedings after the remittal of the case by the appellate court on 13 November 2002 and found no delays on the part of the District Court. As result, the court found that during this period the District Court had not violated the applicant’s right to have his case heard within a reasonable time. The  considered that it could not examine the part of the proceedings that had been pending between 1991 and 2002 before the  as this part of proceedings had already ended. The court stated:
“...The District Court cannot be held responsible for possible delays that might have occurred before the  during the period between 24 May 1991 when the case was transferred to it and 14 May 2002 when the court gave a judgment...
According to the provisions [of the 2004 Act] the Regional Court examining the complaint lodged by [the applicant] that the proceedings in his case before the District Court exceeded a reasonable time is not entitled to examine the course of the proceedings before the Szczecin Regional Court...”
It appears that the civil proceedings in this case are pending before the Szczecin District Court.
Articles 417 et seq. of the Civil Code (Kodeks cywilny) provide for the State’s liability in tort.
In the version applicable until 1 September 2004, Article 417 § 1, which lays down a general rule, read as follows:
“1.  The State Treasury shall be liable for damage caused by a State official in the course of carrying out the duties entrusted to him.”
On 1 September 200 the Law of 17 June 2004 on amendments to the Civil Code and other statutes (Ustawa o zmianie ustawy – Kodeks cywilny oraz niektórych innych ustaw) (“the 2004 Amendment”) entered into force. While the relevant amendments have in essence been aimed at enlarging the scope of the State Treasury’s liability for tort under Article 417 of the Civil Code – which included adding a new Article 4171 and the institution of the State’s tortious liability for its omission to enact legislation (the so-called “legislative omission”; “zaniedbanie legislacyjne”) – they are also to be seen in the context of the operation of a new statute introducing remedies for the unreasonable length of judicial proceedings (see paragraphs 25 below).
Following the 2004 Amendment, Article 4171 was added which, in so far as relevant, reads as follows:
“3.  If damage has been caused by a failure to give a ruling (orzeczenie) or decision (decyzja) where there is a statutory duty to give them, reparation for [the damage] may be sought after it has been established in the relevant proceedings that the failure to give a ruling or decision was contrary to the law, unless otherwise provided for by other specific provisions.”
However, under the transitional provision of section 5 of the 2004 Amendment, Article 417 as applicable before 1 September 2004 (see paragraph 22 above) shall apply to all events and legal situations that subsisted before that date.
Under Article 442 of the Civil Code the claim for redress of damage caused by a tort becomes time-barred after the lapse of three years from the day on which the person who suffered the damage learns about the damage and about persons or entities liable to make reparation for it. However, in any case the claim expires after the lapse of ten years from the day on which the event that caused the damage occurred.
That provision applies to situations covered by Article 417 of the Civil Code.
On 17 September 2004 the Law of 17 June 2004 on complaints about a breach of the right to a trial within a reasonable time (Ustawa o skardze na naruszenie prawa strony do rozpoznania sprawy w postępowaniu sądowym bez nieuzasadnionej zwłoki) (“the 2004 Act”) entered into force. It lays down various legal means designed to counteract and/or redress the undue length of judicial proceedings.
Section 2 of the 2004 Act reads, in so far as relevant:
“1.  A party to proceedings may lodge a complaint that their right to a trial within a reasonable time has been breached [in the proceedings] if the proceedings in the case last longer than is necessary to examine the factual and legal circumstances of the case ... or longer than is necessary to conclude enforcement proceedings or other proceedings concerning the execution of a court decision (unreasonable length of proceedings).”
Section 4 provides, in so far as relevant:
“1.  The complaint shall be examined by the court immediately above the court conducting the impugned proceedings.
If the complaint concerns an unreasonable delay in the proceedings before the Court of Appeal or the Supreme Court it shall be examined by the Supreme Court. ...”
Section 5 reads, in so far as relevant:
“1.  A complaint about the unreasonable length of proceedings shall be lodged while the proceedings are pending. ...”
Section 12 provides for measures that may be applied by the court dealing with the complaint. It reads, in so far as relevant:
“1.  The court shall dismiss a complaint which is unjustified.
If the court considers that the complaint is justified, it shall find that there was an unreasonable delay in the impugned proceedings.
At the request of the complainant, the court may instruct the court examining the merits of the case to take certain measures within a fixed time-limit. Such instructions shall not concern the factual and legal assessment of the case.
If the complaint is justified the court may, at the request of the complainant, grant ... just satisfaction in an amount not exceeding PLN 10,000 to be paid by the State Treasury. If such just satisfaction is granted it shall be paid out of the budget of the court which conducted the delayed proceedings.”
Section 18 lays down transitional rules in relation to the applications already pending before the Court. It reads, in so far as relevant:
“1.  Within six months after the date of entry into force of this law persons who, before that date, had lodged a complaint with the European Court of Human Rights ... complaining of a breach of the right to a trial within a reasonable time guaranteed by Article 6 (1) of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms ..., may lodge a complaint about the unreasonable length of the proceedings on the basis of the provisions of this law if their complaint to the Court had been lodged in the course of the impugned proceedings and if the Court has not adopted a decision concerning the admissibility of their case.
...”
On 18 January 2005 Supreme Court (Sąd Najwyższy) adopted a resolution (no. III SPP 113/04) in which it ruled that while the 2004 Act produced legal effects as from the date of its date of entry into force (17 September 2004), its provisions applied retroactively to all proceedings in which delays had occurred before that date and had not yet been remedied.