The applicant alleged that the refusal by the domestic courts to sanction a newspaper for an article commenting on what it depicted as her private and sexual life had constituted a failure by the respondent State to comply with its positive obligation under Article 8 of the Convention to protect her right to respect for her private life and her reputation.
The applicant was born in 1976 and lives in Baku. The applicant was represented by Mr R. Hajili, a lawyer based in Strasbourg, and Mrs Z. Sadigova, a lawyer practising in Azerbaijan.
The Government were represented by their Agent, Mr. Ç. Əsgərov.
The facts of the case, as submitted by the parties, may be summarised as follows.
The applicant has been a renowned investigative journalist since 2005. She worked as a staff reporter and director at the Azerbaijani service of Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty (“Azadliq Radio”), whose broadcasts were often critical of the government, covering various topics, including corruption and violations of human rights (see for more details Khadija Ismayilova v. Azerbaijan, nos. 65286/13 and 57270/14, § 6, 10 January 2019, and Khadija Ismayilova v. Azerbaijan (no. 2), no. 30778/15, §§ 6-10 [27 February 2020], not yet final). In addition, she worked as a regional coordinator for the Organised Crime and Corruption Reporting Project, where she trained journalists in investigation techniques and crossborder reporting. She has received a number of international awards for her journalistic activity.
The applicant conducted journalistic investigations into corruption in Azerbaijan. Between 2010 and 2012 she published and contributed to several articles concerning the President’s family (see Khadija Ismayilova, cited above, §§ 7-8, and Khadija Ismayilova (no. 2), cited above, § 11).
According to the applicant, she began receiving threats after the publication of her articles. On 7 March 2012 she received an anonymous letter threatening that a secretly filmed video of her of an intimate nature would be made public. On 14 March 2012 a video was posted online on a website named “musavat.tv”, featuring scenes of a sexual nature involving the applicant and a man who, according to her, was her then boyfriend, taken with a hidden camera secretly installed in her bedroom. Following a complaint by the applicant, a criminal investigation was launched, which turned out to be ineffective.
At around the same time as the posting of the video and afterwards, a number of articles criticising the applicant were published in various newspapers. In particular, on 13 March 2012 the newspaper Yeni Azərbaycan (the official newspaper of the ruling New Azerbaijan Party) published an article titled “Khadija Ismayilova as she seems and as she is”. The article began with a reference to the applicant’s statement about receiving the threatening letter. It went on to criticise the applicant and those who had spoken in support of her. In particular, it criticised both her and a colleague at Azadliq Radio for lack of professionalism and antigovernment bias. Moreover, citing another former employee of Azadliq Radio, it also insinuated that the applicant was a person of immoral behaviour who spent a great deal of her time in bars and clubs and regularly held all-night parties and “orgies” with her friends in her office. The same article was published in the newspaper İki Sahil on 15 March 2012.
On 16 March 2012 the newspaper Səs published an article titled “Not surprising”. The article spoke about a number of scandals in which various opposition politicians had been involved. At the end, the article briefly alluded to the above incident involving the applicant, without going into much detail about it, but stating that it was not surprising that many oppositionoriented individuals were involved in “sex scandals”. On 5 April 2012 Səs published another article titled “Who should Khadija sue?” attacking the applicant for “immoral behaviour” and suggesting that the video scandal had been created by herself and her friends at “musavat.tv”. Several more articles mentioning the applicant were published later in Səs, besides the one which gave rise to the present application (see Section B below).
In the summer of 2013 another video, filmed with the same hidden camera, was posted on the internet.
The above-mentioned events are the subject of the Court’s judgment in Khadija Ismayilova (cited above), in which the Court found two violations of Article 8 of the Convention and a violation of Article 10 of the Convention.
Following the events giving rise to the present application, in December 2014 the applicant was arrested and detained on a charge of having incited a former colleague to commit suicide. In February 2015 she was additionally charged with the criminal offences of large-scale misappropriation, illegal entrepreneurship, large-scale tax evasion and abuse of power in connection with her activity as the director of Azadliq Radio between 1 July 2008 and 1 October 2010. The events relating to her arrest and detention are the subject of the Court’s judgment in Khadija Ismayilova (no. 2) (cited above), in which the Court found violations of Articles 5 §§ 1 and 4, 6 § 2 and 18 of the Convention, taken in conjunction with Article 5.
On 1 September 2015 the applicant was sentenced to seven and a half years’ imprisonment. After a series of appeals, on 25 May 2016 she was acquitted in part and her sentence was reduced to three and a half years’ imprisonment, conditionally suspended for five years. She was released from prison on the same day.
According to the information page on its website, the newspaper Səs, mentioned in paragraph 8 above, is a “socio-political newspaper” founded in 1990 and in circulation since 1991. Starting from 1998, it has been published daily. According to the newspaper itself, “Səs has played the role of the party base for the New Azerbaijan Party and, after the party’s establishment, has continued its activity as its media trumpet”.
On 6 November 2012, around eight months after the dissemination of the first video (see paragraph 6 above) and before the dissemination of the second video (see paragraph 9 above), and while the criminal investigation into the invasion of the applicant’s private life was still ongoing, Səs published an article titled “A historical house of MPs” (“Tarixi deputatxana”), authored under the pen-name Rovshan. The compound word “deputatxana”, which does not have a direct equivalent in English, was a pejorative neologism meaning “parliament” (used here instead of the usual “parlament”).
The first paragraph of the article began with a rhetorical question as to why opposition-oriented journalists, to whom the author referred as “penpushing blabbermouths”, were not capable of writing about any other topics except constantly criticising either “those in power” or members of the National Assembly. It then stated that those opposition journalists did not want to remember that, at the time the current opposition had been in power in 1992, the same National Assembly had been a “deputatxana” of representatives of the Popular Front Party and the Müsavat Party (whom the article repeatedly and pejoratively referred to as “cəbhəkratlar”, “müsavatkratlar” and “müsavatxorlar” (no direct English equivalent)).
In the next paragraph, the article stated that various negative things had happened in Parliament in 1992, such as some MPs making insulting accusations against then-President Elchibey; some “smoking Marlboro cigarettes while high on cannabis” inside the session hall of the parliament; some being hung-over after spending whole nights in restaurants and bars; some asleep and loudly snoring; and some others making official speeches filled with expletives. The author referred to the MPs of that time as slackers and wondered why the opposition-oriented journalists spoke of the current parliament as a “zoo” or a “harem”, but did not speak about their own “donkeys”, “jackals” and “venomous snakes” whom even a real zoo would not accept.
The author began the last paragraph by commenting on a recent article written by an unnamed journalist from the opposition’s Yeni Müsavat newspaper (it appears that he was referring to Zamin Haji, a well-known columnist), in which the latter had spoken about the former Italian pornographic actress Cicciolina (Ilona Staller), who had been elected as a member of the Italian Parliament and, after having been elected, had made critical comments about Saddam Hussein and Osama bin Laden. The author wondered what “silly ideas” had crossed the journalist’s mind when he had written about her, and further wondered if such “silly ideas” extended to suggesting that the Azerbaijani Parliament should also have a pornographic actress among its members. The author then continued:
“If opposition newspapers’ pen-pushing blabbermouths have such cheap and narrow thoughts, let them make room for Khadija Ismayilova in their Public Chamber and name her the Public Chamber’s Pornstar Cicciolina! And the Popular Front and Müsavat non-MPs should enjoy the ‘national’ Cicciolina as much as they like. After all, they are quite used to such things! And we can put lovely headlines on such adventures. For example, ‘Which bit of Cicciolina did Zamin Haji kiss?’, ‘Why did Elnur Astanbayli show his tongue to Cicciolina sexually?’, ‘Natiq Gahramanoglu and Samir Sari were not able to share Cicciolina!’, ‘The queue for Cicciolina at the Public Chamber’ and so on.”
Original in Azerbaijani:
“Əgər müxalifətyönlü qəzetlərin qələm dağarcıqları bu qədər ucuz və dar düşüncəyə malikdirlərsə, getsinlər öz ‘İctimai Palata’larında Xədicə İsmayılovaya yer ayırsınlar, adını da qoysunlar ‘İctimai Palata’nın PORNOULDUZ ÇİÇÇOLİNOSU [sic]! Cəbhəkrat və Müsavatkrat deputatxanalıqlar isə ‘milli’ ÇİÇÇOLİNODAN istədikləri qədər feyz alsınlar. Axı onlar belə şeylərə kifayət qədər alışıqlıdırlar! Bizlər də həmin macəralara qəşəng-qəşəng başlıqlar qoyaq. Məsələn, ‘Zamin Hacı Çiççolinonun harasından maç elədi?’, ‘Elnur Astanbəyli Çiççolinoya niyə seksual xarakterli dil göstərdi?’, ‘Natiq Güləhmədoğlu Samir Sarı ilə Çiççolinonu bölüşdürə bilmədi!’, ‘İctimai Palatada Çiççolino növbəsi’ və s.”
On 27 December 2012 the applicant brought an action against the newspaper, relying inter alia on Articles 32 and 46 of the Constitution, Article 8 of the Convention, Article 23 of the Civil Code, Article 10 of the Law on Mass Media and the Constitutional Court’s decision of 31 May 2002. She claimed that the article was insulting and damaging to her honour and dignity, her right to respect for her private and family life, and her right to freedom of expression. She submitted that she was facing blackmail in connection with her journalistic activity: her private life had recently been invaded and a hidden intimate video recording of her had been filmed and released on the internet. Referring specifically to the passage cited in paragraph 17 above, she argued that the article in question was part of a larger campaign mounted against her in the pro-government press in retaliation for her journalistic activity and that it had made her into an object of ridicule by “lowering her in the eyes of society”. The article had used the incident involving the hidden video for the purpose of insulting her and damaging her reputation. The insulting and derogatory statements made in the article had caused her to experience significant mental suffering and had tarnished her reputation in the eyes of her colleagues, friends, relatives and readers. She requested the court to order the newspaper to publish an apology and sought compensation for distress in the amount of 50,000 Azerbaijani manats (AZN).
The respondent newspaper argued before the court that the applicant should have sued “musavat.tv”, the original publication source of the hidden video, and not the newspaper, which had simply written a critical commentary about her. The newspaper submitted that it too condemned the interference with the applicant’s private life. However, being a “just, fair and highly reputed newspaper”, it had a duty to its readers to inform them about “social, political and other events of public interest”. The respondent newspaper further stated that, in its view, the fact that the applicant, who was not married, had an extramarital sexual relationship with “some person” was contrary to the image of a woman as “the highest manifestation of our national and moral values”. Behaviour such as the applicant’s could be damaging to the morals of younger generations. The newspaper argued that the contents of the article in question fell within the limits of its right to freely express its opinions. It further contended that the article could not have damaged the applicant’s reputation because, contrary to her submissions, it was not believable that she possessed a reputable image among readers in the first place. In this connection, it went on to criticise some of the applicant’s past views and actions, which, in its view, were proopposition or even unpatriotic. It stated that no one supported her, not even other pro-opposition journalists and politicians mentioned in the article, because none of them had sued the newspaper on account of the matter.
By a judgment of 13 February 2013 the Sabail District Court, referring to Article 47 of the Constitution, Article 23 of the Civil Code, the decision of the Plenum of the Supreme Court of 14 May 1999 and the decision of the Constitutional Court of 31 May 2002, dismissed the applicant’s claim, reasoning as follows:
“On the basis of the evidence examined at the hearing, the court concludes that the Constitution guarantees freedom of thought and expression. The [article published] in the newspaper Səs is a manifestation of the freedom of thought and expression and of the journalist’s independent opinion. Assessing this article as degrading to honour and dignity could be construed as forcing a person to think differently and contrary to his will, and therefore the claim should be dismissed. When dismissing the claim, the court has also taken into account that, while the claimant is under a burden to prove that she endured physical and mental suffering, she has not [proved it], and therefore the claim should be dismissed.”
The applicant appealed, reiterating her claims and arguments. She also insisted that she had endured mental suffering as a result of the nature of the publication, which was insulting and harmful to her honour and dignity, and that it was difficult to prove the existence of mental suffering through any concrete arguments. She argued that anyone would experience mental suffering in the same situation. She further submitted that it was up to the court to assess the severity of suffering and moral damage inflicted in the present case.
By a judgment of 13 June 2013 the Baku Court of Appeal dismissed her appeal, upholding the first-instance court’s reasoning.
On 23 October 2013 the Supreme Court dismissed a further appeal by the applicant, finding that the appellate court had correctly applied the substantive and procedural rules of law.
The relevant Articles of the Constitution, as in force at the relevant time, provided as follows:
Article 32.  Right to personal inviolability
“I.  Everyone has the right to personal inviolability.
Everyone has the right to keep secret private and family life. It is prohibited to interfere with private or family life, except in cases established by law. Everyone has the right to be protected from unlawful interference in his or her private and family life.
No one may collect, keep, use and disseminate information about a person’s private life without his or her consent. ...
...
Except in cases prescribed by law, everyone may become acquainted with information collected concerning him or her. Everyone has a right to demand the correction or elimination of information concerning him or her which does not correspond to the truth, is incomplete or has been collected by means of a violation of the requirements of the law.
...”
Article 46.  Right to defend the honour and dignity
“I.  Everyone has the right to defend his or her honour and dignity.
The dignity of a person is protected by the State. No circumstance can justify humiliation of a person’s dignity. ...”
Article 47.  Freedom of thought and expression
“I.  Everyone has freedom of thought and expression.
No one shall be forced to disclose his or her thoughts and beliefs or to renounce his or her thoughts and beliefs. ...
...”
Article 71.  Protection of human and citizens’ rights and freedoms
“I.  Bodies of the legislative, executive and judicial powers have the duty to ensure and to protect human and citizens’ rights and freedoms established by the Constitution.
No one may restrict the implementation of human and citizens’ rights and freedoms. Everyone’s rights and freedoms shall be restricted only on the grounds specified in this Constitution and the legislation, as well as by the rights and freedoms of others.
...
Any disputes concerning violations of human and citizens’ rights and freedoms shall be settled in the courts of law.
...”
The relevant provisions of the Civil Code, as in force at the material time, provided as follows:
Article 23. Protection of honour, dignity and business reputation
“23.1.  An individual is entitled to obtain, by way of a court order, a retraction of information harming his or her honour, dignity or business reputation, disclosing secrets relating to his or her private or family life or breaching his or her personal or family inviolability, provided that the person who disseminated such information fails to prove that the information was true. The same rule shall also apply in cases of incomplete publication of factual information if, as a result, the honour, dignity or business reputation of an individual is harmed. ...
2.  If information harming the honour, dignity or business reputation of an individual or invading the secrecy of his or her private or family life is disseminated in the mass media, the information shall be retracted in the same mass media source. ...
3.  If the mass media publish information breaching an individual’s rights and interests protected by law, that individual has the right to publish his or her reply in the same mass media source.
4.  In addition to the right to seek a retraction of the information harming his or her honour, dignity or business reputation, the individual has the right to claim compensation for damage caused by the dissemination of such information. ...”
The relevant provisions of the Law on Mass Media, as in force at the material time, provided as follows:
Article 10.  Prohibition of abuse of the freedom of mass media
“It is prohibited to use the mass media for the purposes of disseminating secrets protected by the legislation of the Republic of Azerbaijan, violently changing the existing constitutional State order, attacking the integrity of the State, promoting war, violence and cruelty, propagating ethnic, racial or social intolerance, publishing under the guise of an authoritative source rumours or false and biased articles degrading the honour and dignity of citizens, [publishing] pornographic material, slandering, or other illegal actions.
...”
Article 44.  The right to retraction, correction and response
“If a mass media source provides information of a slanderous and insulting nature degrading the honour and dignity of an individual or a legal entity, the individual or his or her representative, or the chief officers or authorised representatives of the legal entity, have the right, within a period of one month, to respond in the same mass media source, to demand a retraction or correction of the false information, and an apology, or to apply directly to a court.
...”
Article 60.  Liability for abusing the freedom of the mass media 
and journalistic rights
“The editorial board (chief editor) and journalists (authors) of a mass media source shall be subject to civil, administrative, criminal or other liability for:
...
(4)  breaching the privacy of citizens;
...”
The decision of the Plenum of the Supreme Court of 14 May 1999 on the practice of the courts in the application of the legislation on protection of honour and dignity reads as follows, in so far as relevant:
“6.  ... When claiming compensation for non-pecuniary damage, the claimant must prove that he or she has endured physical or mental suffering.”
The decision of the Constitutional Court of 31 May 2002 on the interpretation of Articles 21 and 23 of the Civil Code of the Republic of Azerbaijan reads as follows, in so far as relevant:
“If a person’s honour, dignity or business reputation is harmed, this causes the person to experience distress and suffering and to feel morally insulted.
...
The provisions of Article 21 of the Civil Code ... concern only compensation for material damage as well as loss of opportunity. As for the damages provided for by Article 23 of the same Code, they must be understood as covering the non-pecuniary damage (physical and mental suffering) and pecuniary damage caused by the harm to honour, dignity or business reputation.”