The case originated in an application (no. 74152/01) against the Czech Republic lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) on 14 September 2001 by Rodinná záložna, spořitelní a úvěrní družstvo, a credit union (“the applicant credit union”) and Mr Drahoslav Honek, Mr Jiří Halberštát, Mr Václav Vaněrka and Mr Jan Živný, members of the credit union and of its management and supervisory organs.
The applicants were represented by Mr M. Nespala, a lawyer practising in . The Czech Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Mr V.A. Schorm, and Deputy Agent, Mr J. Kmec, of the Ministry of Justice.
In a judgment delivered on 9 December 2010 (“the principal judgment”), the Court held that there had been a violation of Article 6 of the Convention and Article 1 of Protocol No. 1 in respect of the applicant credit union. It further held that it was not necessary to rule on the allegation of a violation of Article 13 of the Convention and declared all the complaints of the individual applicants inadmissible (Rodinná záložna, spořitelní a úvěrní družstvo and Others v. , no. 74152/01, 9 December 2010, “the principal judgment”).
Under Article 41 of the Convention the applicants sought just satisfaction in the form of restitutio in integrum or compensation for pecuniary and non-pecuniary damage sustained and reimbursement of costs and expenses incurred.
Since the question of the application of Article 41 of the Convention was not ready for decision, the Court reserved it and invited the Government and the applicant credit union to submit, within three months, their written observations on that issue and, in particular, to notify the Court of any agreement they might have reached (ibid., § 74, and point 5. of the operative provisions). The limit for filing observations was later extended for another three months.
The parties did not reach an agreement on the question of just satisfaction.
The applicant credit union and the Government each filed observations.