The case originated in an application (no. 35425/07) against the Russian Federation lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Russian national, Ms Anna Nikolayevna Gorlova (“the applicant”), on 12 July 2007.
The Russian Government (“the Government”) were represented initially by Mr G. Matyushkin, the Representative of the Russian Federation to the European Court of Human Rights, and then by his successor in that office, Mr M. Galperin.
On 9 March 2009 the application was communicated to the Government.
The applicant was born in 1942 and lives in Sochi.
The applicant obtained three judgments in her favour against various domestic authorities specified in the Appendix.
The judgments were either enforced with a delay or remained unenforced until the date of receipt of the parties’ latest submissions, as specified in the table below.
According to the Government, to enforce the judgment of 23 June 2005 the authorities held a public auction to determine a company to perform the renovation of the applicant’s flat in Yakutsk. On 3 October 2008 the applicant refused to let the employees of the winner private company in, and they were unable to start the renovation works in the flat. In November 2008 the bailiffs sent a notification to the applicant that the renovation works were scheduled for 19 November 2008, but the notification was never delivered to her, as in the meantime she had moved to a different town. In March 2009 the bailiffs and the local administration employees attempted to visit the flat in question and compiled an act on the applicant’s absence from the flat.
On 11 November 2004 the Justice of the Peace of the 41st Court Circuit of Yakutsk granted the applicant’s complaint about the bailiffs’ inaction in various rounds of the enforcement proceedings concerning other judgments in her favour and ordered the bailiffs’ service of Yakutsk to pay the applicant 200,000.15 Russian roubles (RUB) of compensation.
The applicant requested to amend the judgment, to replace the respondent authority by the Ministry of Justice of the Russian Federation. Referring to the applicant’s request, on 9 February 2005 the Justice of the Peace, of the 41st Court Circuit of Yakutsk annulled the judgment of 11 November 2004 and ordered that the proceedings be reopened.
In May 2005 the case was forwarded for examination to the Yakutsk Town Court according to the jurisdiction rules, on the respondent’s request. The applicant unsuccessfully challenged the decision to transfer the case; the final decision was issued on 16 June 2005 by the Yakutsk Town Court. On 28 June 2005 the proceedings were suspended on the applicant’s request. Since that date the applicant had not lodged any further applications with domestic courts. On 20 December 2005 the Yakutsk Town Court left the applicant’s action against the bailiffs without examination, for the applicant’s lack of interest in maintaining the case. The applicant did not appeal against the decision.
On 19 November 2004 the Yakutsk Town Court granted the applicant’s civil action against the municipal unitary enterprise “Payment Processing Centre” (МУП «ЕРКЦ») of Yakutsk. The court found that the respondent company, when calculating the communal charges, had failed to take account of the water provider’s failure to supply water to the applicant’s flat in summer, as well as of the applicant’s absence from home for a specific period of time. The court ordered the enterprise (1) to count RUB 25,500 already paid by the applicant towards her debt in respect of communal charges; to recalculate the charges on account of (2) the applicant’s long-term absence and (3) the lack of hot water supply; and (4) to provide information about communal services already paid by her.
On 22 December 2004 the Supreme Court of the Sakha (Yakutiya) Republic upheld the judgment on appeal. The court found, in particular, that the enterprise was a due respondent, as the Yakutsk administration had delegated to it the power to collect communal charges from the population.
The debtor company was incorporated as a municipal unitary enterprise set up by a decision of the local administration. The company had “the right of economic control” (право хозяйственного ведения) over the assets allocated to it by the administration in order to carry out its statutory activities. The parties did not provide information on its core activities. It appears that it was, inter alia, in charge of collection of communal charges from local population. It also provided programming, data processing and IT consultancy services.
According to the Government, on 14 December 2004 the company’s activity was discontinued as the company was re-structured in the form of transformation (реорганизована в форме преобразования) and incorporated as open joint-stock company OAO “Payment Processing Centre” («ОАО ЕРКЦ», “the OAO”). On the same date a relevant record was made in the Register of Legal Entities. The parties did not provide information on the owners of the newly-created company’s shares, did not submit a copy of the transfer and acceptance act and did not provide any details on the legal succession issue.
On 21 January 2005 the writs of execution were issued in respect of the judgment of 19 November 2004, and on 1 February 2005 the enforcement proceedings were opened.
Referring to a “notification” dated 19 April 2005 by the municipal unitary enterprise “Payment Processing Centre”, the Government submitted that on an unspecified date the judgment had been enforced in part, in so far as the obligations to count the amount toward the applicant’s debt and to recalculate the charges on account of the lack of hot water were concerned. They did not submit a copy of the notification.
It appears that on 6 September 2007 the writs were returned to the bailiffs by an unspecified person or authority without execution.
On 12 September 2007 the bailiffs’ service discontinued the enforcement proceedings in respect of the remaining part of the judgment on account of the impossibility to enforce it and returned the writs of execution to the Yakutsk Town Court. The parties did not provide copies of the relevant documents.
According to the Government, on 23 August 2008 the OAO was liquidated.
Article 58 § 5 of the Civil Code, as in force at the material time, provided that in case of restructuring in the form of transformation, rights and obligations of the restructured legal entity are transferred to a newlycreated legal entity in accordance with the transfer and acceptance act (передаточный акт).
The transfer and acceptance act must contain provisions on succession for all obligations of the restructured legal entity in relation to all its creditors and debtors, including obligations contested by the parties. The transfer and acceptance act is approved by the legal entity’s founders (partners) or the body which has made a decision to restructure legal entities and is submitted together with constituent documents for official registration of newly-created legal entities or in order to introduce changes in constituent documents of the existing legal entities. A failure to submit a transfer and acceptance act together with constituent documents, as well as the absence therein of provisions concerning the succession of the restructured legal entity’s obligations entails the denial of the official registration of the newly-created legal entity (Article 59 of the Civil Code).
The owner of the property allocated under the unitary enterprise’s economic control may decide to restructure the company (Article 295 of the Civil Code and section 29 of the Unitary Enterprises Act as in force at the material time). In particular, restructuring could take the form of transformation into a different legal entity (sections 29-35 of the Unitary Enterprises Act).
Section 34 of the Unitary Enterprises Act as in force at the material time stipulated that restructuring of a unitary enterprise in the form of transformation was to be conducted in accordance with domestic privatisation laws, in this case the Privatisation of the State and Municipal Property Act No. 178-FZ of 21 December 2001 (the Privatisation Act). Privatisation of the State and municipal assets meant an alienation of the assets owned by the State or a municipality to a physical or legal person’s ownership, against remuneration (Section 1 of the Privatisation Act).
Pursuant to an owner’s decision, a unitary enterprise could be transformed, inter alia, into an open joint-stock company (Section 13 § 1 of the Privatisation Act).
Creditors were to be notified in writing of the decision to restructure, and the information on that decision was to be published in media sources (Section 29 § 8 of the Unitary Enterprises Act).
The State, the subjects of the Russian Federation and the municipalities are not liable for debts which have not been included in the transfer and acceptance act (Section 27 § 2 of the Privatisation Act).
A transfer and acceptance act, as well as a sale-purchase agreement constituted, among other documents, a ground for registration of the property rights’ transfer to the purchaser. Upon the transfer of the property rights to a purchaser, a unitary enterprise was discontinued. A relevant record was made in the Register of legal entities (Section 27 § 8 of the Privatisation Act).
In the event of liquidation the legal person ceases to exist without succession (Article 61 of the Civil Code, referred to by the Government).
The domestic provisions on the legal status of State and municipal unitary enterprises with the right of economic control are summarised in Liseytseva and Maslov v. Russia, nos. 39483/05 and 40527/10, §§ 54-127, 9 October 2014.
Relevant provisions of the Compensation Act as in force before 1 January 2017 and applicable to cases of non-enforcement of the domestic judgment imposing monetary obligations on State authorities are summarised in Nagovitsyn and Nalgiyev v. Russia (nos. 27451/09 and 60650/09, §§ 15-20, 23 September 2010).
Relevant provisions of the Federal Law No. 450-FZ amending the Compensation Act of 2010, in force as of 1 January 2017 and extending the scope of the Compensation Act to cases of excessive delays in the enforcement of court judgments ordering the domestic authorities to fulfil various obligations in kind are summarised in Shtolts and Others v. Russia (dec.), nos. 77056/14 and 2 others, §§ 3141, 30 January 2018.