On various dates the applicants participated in political demonstrations. They were arrested at the venue of the demonstrations and subsequently convicted of an administrative offence.
The applicants’ details are set out in the appended table.
The Government were represented by Mr G. Matyushkin, Representative of the Russian Federation at the European Court of Human Rights, then by Mr A. Fedorov, Head of the Office of the Representative of the Russian Federation at the European Court of Human Rights, and subsequently by Mr M. Galperin, Representative of the Russian Federation at the European Court of Human Rights.
The facts of the case, as submitted by the parties, may be summarised as follows.
On the dates indicated in the appended table the applicants participated in various political demonstrations. They were apprehended at the venue of the demonstrations and transferred to various police stations in Moscow or St Petersburg where the relevant administrative records were drawn up. The records of the administrative offence were based on the reports and explanations of the police officers who had arrested the applicants. Some of the applicants were released several hours later, while others spent the night at the police station.
On the dates stipulated in the appended table the applicants were convicted under Article 19.3 § 1 of the Code of Administrative Offences (a refusal to obey the lawful order of a police officer). Some of the applicants were ordered to pay fines ranging between 500 Russian roubles (RUB) and RUB 1,000, while others were sentenced to administrative imprisonment for three to fifteen days (see the appended table). The domestic courts relied on the administrative records, the reports and explanations of the police officers. In particular, the courts considered unlawful that some of the applicants shouted slogans and/or refused to stop participating in a public assembly in respect of which no advance notification had been submitted to the authorities.
For a summary of the relevant domestic law see Navalnyy v. Russia [GC] (nos. 29580/12 and 4 others, §§ 46-47, 15 November 2018).
The domestic legal provisions governing administrative transfer (escorting) and detention are also set out in the case of Butkevich v. Russia (no. 5865/07, §§ 33-36, 13 February 2018).
APPENDIX