The case originated in an application (no. 51099/10) against the Republic of Moldova lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Moldovan national, Mrs Tatiana Grecu (“the applicant”), on 23 July 2010.
The applicant was represented by Mr V. Vieru, a lawyer practising in Chisinau. The Moldovan Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent at the time, Mr L. Apostol.
The applicant alleged, in particular, that she had been subjected to inhuman and degrading treatment by the police and unlawfully detained.
On 18 November 2014 the complaints concerning Articles 3, 5 and 13 of the Convention were communicated to the Government and the remainder of the application was declared inadmissible, pursuant to Rule 54 § 3 of the Rules of Court.
The applicant was born in 1960 and is detained in Vadul lui Voda.
On 22 February 2002 at 7 a.m. the applicant was arrested and placed in detention. She was released at 4.40 p.m. on the same day after a court had found that her detention had been abusive and had ordered her release.
In the meantime, during her detention, the applicant was subjected to ill-treatment by the police. In particular, she was punched and strangled. After release, the applicant went to a hospital, where she was diagnosed with concussion and multiple bruises on her head and neck. She lodged a criminal complaint in relation to the above-mentioned facts; however, it was not successful.
On an unspecified date, the applicant initiated civil proceedings against the State, claiming compensation for unlawful detention and illtreatment.
By a final judgment of 9 August 2012, the Supreme Court of Justice found a breach of the applicant’s rights, as guaranteed by Articles 3 and 5 of the Convention, on account of her unlawful detention and ill-treatment on 22 February 2002. The Supreme Court also found a breach of the applicant’s rights, as guaranteed by Articles 6 and 13 of the Convention, on account of the length and ineffectiveness of the criminal investigation conducted into the applicant’s complaints of abusive actions on the part of the police. The Supreme Court awarded her 3,200 euros (EUR) in compensation.