The cases originated in three applications (nos. 37225/07, 7456/08 and 12255/08) against the Republic of Moldova lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by two Moldovan nationals and one company based in Moldova (“the applicants”).
Following the entry into force of Protocol No. 14 to the Convention, the present applications were attributed to a committee of three judges and the parties have been informed as to this fact.
The applicants obtained favourable decisions concerning various goods by means of final judgments. These judgments have later been quashed following revision proceedings or appeals lodged out of time initiated by third parties. Detailed information concerning the applicants and their proceedings can be found in the appended table.
The relevant provisions of the Code of Civil Procedure read as follows:
“Section 114. Extension of a time-limit
Where a person has failed to comply with a legal time-limit for reasons considered by a court to be plausible, that time-limit may be extended by the court.
A request for the extension of the time-limit shall be lodged with the court concerned and shall be examined at a court hearing....
A court judgment dismissing a request for extension of a time-limit may be challenged by way of an appeal.
Section 284. The extension of the time-limit
The time-limit for lodging an appeal may be extended in accordance with the provisions of section 114 of the present Code. If a court does not have reasons to extend the time-limit, it shall dismiss the appeal as time-barred.
Section 305. The time-limit for lodging an appeal in cassation
The legal time-limit for lodging an appeal in cassation is fifteen days, unless the law provides otherwise.
Section 314. The judgment of the cassation instance and the procedural provisions
The issuance of the judgment as well as other procedural provisions before the appeal instance should be applicable to the proceedings before the cassation instance.
Section 316. Irrevocable judgments (Hotărârile irevocabile)
Irrevocable judgments are:
...
3)  non-appealed judgments, issued by the appeal instances.
Section 449. Reasons for lodging a revision request
A revision request shall be granted when:
...
b)  Certain essential circumstances or facts of the case become known which were not and could not have been known to the applicant;
(c)  After a judgment has been adopted, new documents have been discovered which have been held by one of the participants to the proceedings or which could not have been submitted to the court during the proceedings because of circumstances beyond the control of the interested party;
...
(h)  The  has found a violation of the fundamental rights and freedoms...
Section 450. The time-limit for lodging a revision
A revision request may be lodged:
...
(c)  within three months of the date on which the person concerned has come to know essential circumstances or facts of the case which were unknown to him/her earlier and which could not have been known to him/her earlier - in cases concerning Article 449 (b);
(d)  within three months of the date on which the document was discovered - in cases concerning Article 449 (c);
...
(g)  within three months of the date on which the European Court of Human Rights adopted the judgment – in cases concerning Article 449 (h).”