The case originated in an application (no. 29660/03) against the  lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Croatian national, Mr Vladimir Štitić (“the applicant”), on 1 September 2003.
The applicant, who had been granted legal aid, was represented by Mr D. Plavec, a lawyer practising in . The Croatian Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Mrs Š. Stažnik.
The applicant alleged, in particular, that two sets of disciplinary proceedings against him, one conducted in Lepoglava State Prison, and the other in Gospić Prison, had been unfair, that the general conditions in Gospić Prison and the lack of adequate medical care for an injury he had sustained there had amounted to degrading treatment, that his right to respect for his correspondence had been violated and that he lacked an effective remedy in respect of his Article 3 complaints.
On 9 November 2006 the Court declared the application partly inadmissible and decided to communicate the complaints concerning the fairness of the disciplinary proceedings conducted against the applicant in Lepoglava State Prison and in Gospić Prison, the complaint concerning the general conditions in Gospić Prison and the alleged lack of adequate medical care for his injury, and the complaints concerning the applicant's right to respect for his correspondence and the lack of an effective remedy in respect of his Article 3 complaints to the Government. Under the provisions of Article 29 § 3 of the Convention, it decided to examine the merits of the application at the same time as its admissibility.
The applicant was born in 1967 and is presently serving a prison term in Šibenik Prison.
Following a series of criminal convictions for drug abuse, the applicant was sent to serve the sentence in Lepoglava State Prison (Kazneni zavod Lepoglava) on 11 November 2002. On 29 July 2004 he was transferred to Gospić Prison.
While the applicant was serving a prison term in Lepoglava State Prison, the prison authorities instituted disciplinary proceedings against him on an unspecified date. The hearings were held on 10 and 13 October 2003. Both the applicant and his counsel were present at the hearings. The applicant and four witnesses gave evidence in person. In the Head of the Disciplinary Proceedings' decision of 14 October 2003 it was established that on 19 July 2003 the applicant had held closed the door of cell no. 9 and had thus prevented a member of the prison staff from entering the cell and performing his duties. The applicant's conduct was found to be in breach of section 145 § 3(10) of the Enforcement of Prison Sentences Act (Zakon o izvršavanju kazne zatvora) and he was sentenced to seven days' solitary confinement suspended for three months. The decision was served on the applicant on 17 October 2003 at 2.45 p.m. It was also served on his counsel on an unspecified date. The applicant's counsel lodged an appeal against the decision on Monday, 20 October 2003.
In a decision of 27 October 2003 the Varaždin County Court judge responsible for the execution of sentences declared the appeal inadmissible as being out of time. The judge held that the time-limit for an appeal was forty-eight hours and that the time-limit had expired on 19 October 2003 at 2.45 p.m. despite the fact that this day had been a Sunday. The time-limit could not be extended to the first working day, since it had been fixed in hours.
During his stay in Gospić Prison the prison authorities opened disciplinary proceedings against the applicant. The prison authorities found that on 16 August 2004 the applicant had attempted to smuggle illegal drugs into the prison via a letter sent to him by his girlfriend, which constituted a disciplinary offence under section 145 (3)(11) of the Enforcement of Prison Sentences Act. In his decision of 2 November 2004 the Head of Disciplinary Proceedings imposed on the applicant a disciplinary measure consisting of a restriction on his movement inside the prison and frequent contacts with the outside world for a period of three months, including a ban on receiving postal parcels, starting from 2 November 2004.
In an appeal of 16 November 2004 the applicant, inter alia, alleged that he had not attended the final hearing before the prison disciplinary authorities because his lawyer had not been present. The applicant also alleged that the notes of that hearing had not been served on him. He further stated that his counsel would elaborate on these issues in a separate appeal. On 16 November 2004 counsel lodged a separate appeal whereby he contested the findings of the applicant's guilt and the severity of the disciplinary measure imposed. On 18 November 2004 the  judge responsible for the execution of sentences dismissed the appeal. The decision analysed in some detail the evidence presented in the disciplinary proceedings but made no mention of the procedural defects complained of by the applicant.
General conditions of the applicant's stay in Gospić Prison
The applicant submitted that he had firstly been put in cell no. 5 in Unit 1. However, later on he had been moved to Unit 2. He alleged that the room had been very damp, and the mattresses old and torn so that bare wire stuck out. The bed sheets and pillowcases had been dirty and the blankets old and foul smelling. No daylight entered the cell and the electric light had to be switched on all day. He had been locked in his cell for twenty-one hours per day, with no contact with other prisoners or the outside world. He had been allowed two one-hour walks and one hour of exercise in a gym per day, both without the presence of any other prisoner. The rest of the time he had had to spend locked alone in his cell. He had not had regular access to a bathroom or running water and his access to sanitary facilities had been left to the discretion of the prison guards. The heating had been inadequate and the food of low quality. No toiletries had been provided to the applicant and no permanent doctor had been on duty in the prison. Only one doctor (a paediatrician) had come once in a while for an hour at a time.
According to the Government, the main building of the Gospić Prison was built in 1878 and renovated in 1995. It comprised two units. The first (“Unit 1”) consisted of five-bed cells and the other (“Unit 2”) of two-bed cells, each equipped with a toilet. Inmates shared a communal bathroom. Unit 1 had a communal living-room. Disinfection and rat extermination were performed regularly. Inmates' clothes and bed sheets could be washed in the prison laundry every day. The bed sheets were changed once a week.
On 29 July 2004 the applicant had arrived at Gospić Prison. He had been put in Unit 1, under the “semi-open” prison regime until 24 September 2004 when he had been moved to Unit 2, under a higher security regime, to a cell measuring 3.75 x 3.5 metres and sanitary facilities measuring 2 x 1.6 metres, which he had shared with another inmate. In November 2005 he had been moved back to Unit 1 to a cell measuring 7.15 x 3.7 metres with sanitary facilities measuring 1.6 x 1.5 metres, which he had shared with three to four inmates at times. He had stayed there until 17 March 2006 when he had been moved back to Unit 2 due to an incident involving a fight with another inmate. He had stayed there until May 2006 when he had been transferred to Pula Prison. During his stay in Unit 2 the applicant had been locked in his cell save for one hour in the mornings when he had been allowed to go out in the courtyard and for two hours between 8 and 10 p.m. when he had been allowed to watch television, read or play games in a common room. During his stay in Unit 1 the applicant worked for four hours per day.
Medical assistance provided to the applicant
According to the applicant, on 17 March 2005 he had been injured by another prisoner who had struck him twice on the head. He had been taken to a doctor to whom he had complained of general sickness, dizziness and heavy thirst. However, the doctor had only prescribed painkillers and had not made any further examinations. The applicant had asked that an X-ray examination be carried out at his own expense, but this had been refused. He further alleged that he had a bruise under his left eye.
According to the Government the applicant had been seen by the prison doctor the very same day and the following day. The doctor had prescribed painkillers. Following the applicant's further complaints of backache, he had been taken to the  and seen by a specialist. An X-ray examination had been carried out but no fractures had been identified. The applicant had been prescribed further painkillers to be taken orally and a soothing gel. The Government submitted a copy of the medical report from the  to confirm their submissions.
On 14 September 2004 the applicant petitioned the Gospić County Court judge responsible for the execution of sentences, complaining about the prison conditions and also alleging that a postal parcel sent to him by his parents on 30 August 2004, containing three cartons of cigarettes, two magazines on motor cars and one notebook, had never been delivered but had instead been returned to his parents, who had informed the applicant about it.
On 21 September 2004 the judge requested the Gospić Prison authorities to comment on the complaint concerning the alleged non-delivery of the parcel. In his letter to the prison authorities of 24 September 2004, the judge noted that a prison governor was allowed to temporarily prohibit a prisoner from receiving parcels for health and security reasons and that the prisoner in question should be informed about such a decision and the reasons for it. The applicant received a copy of the letter.
The applicant again petitioned the Gospić County Court judge responsible for the execution of sentences on 21 October 2004, repeating his complaints about the prison conditions and further asserting that six to eight letters he had sent to various persons had never been delivered. The judge replied to the applicant's allegations by letter of 8 November 2004 stating that the Gospić Prison authorities had informed him that all his letters had been properly forwarded and instructed the applicant to send future letters via registered mail only. As to the applicant's complaints concerning the prison conditions, the judge expressly stated that he had no jurisdiction to supervise the running of prisons.
Following the incident of 17 March 2006, the applicant was moved back to Unit 2, and the Prison Governor ordered that disciplinary proceedings be instituted against him. On an unspecified date the applicant appealed against that decision, alleging that he had been attacked by another inmate who had struck him twice on the head. The applicant further complained that the medical assistance provided to him had been insufficient since the doctor had only prescribed him painkillers and had not made any further examinations. His request that an X-ray examination be carried out at his own expense had been refused. On 23 March 2006 the  judge responsible for the execution of sentences dismissed the applicant's appeal on the ground that the decision to place the applicant under the “closed prison regime” had been based in law and was a consequence of his conduct, which had endangered the order and security in the prison. No comment was made about the applicant's allegations concerning the lack of adequate medical assistance.
The applicant appealed against the judge's decision on 27 March 2006 to a three-judge panel of the Gospić County Court. In his appeal he complained about the conditions in Unit 2 (see paragraph 11 above). The panel dismissed the applicant's appeal on 28 March 2006 on the ground that the only way to prevent further unacceptable behaviour on his part had been his isolation. They made no remarks concerning the applicant's complaint about the conditions in Unit 2.
Article 23 of the Croatian Constitution (Ustav Republike Hrvatske) provides:
“No one shall be subjected to any form of ill-treatment ...”
The Enforcement of Prison Sentences Act (Zakon o izvršavanju kazne zatvora, Official Gazette no. 128/1999 of 30 November 1999, and no. 190/2003 of 3 December 2003 (consolidated text) – “the Act”) came into force on 1 July 2001, whereas the provisions concerning the judge responsible for the execution of sentences came into force six months later, on 1 January 2002. The relevant provisions of the Act read as follows:
COMPLAINTS
Section 15
“(1) Inmates shall have the right to complain about an act or decision of a prison employee.
(2) Complaints shall be lodged orally or in writing with a prison governor, a judge responsible for the execution of sentences or the Head Office of the Prison Administration. Written complaints addressed to a judge responsible for the execution of sentences or the Head Office of the Prison Administration shall be submitted in an envelope which the prison authorities may not open ...”
JUDICIAL PROTECTION AGAINST ACTS AND DECISIONS OF THE PRISON ADMINISTRATION
Section 17
“(1)  An inmate may lodge a request for judicial protection against any acts or decisions unlawfully denying him, or limiting him in, any of the rights guaranteed by this Act.
(2)  Requests for judicial protection shall be decided by the judge responsible for the execution of sentences.”
PROCEDURE FOR PERSONAL OBJECTS
Section 60
“...
(3) Objects suspected of being connected to a criminal offence shall be forfeited and a record thereof drawn up. These objects shall be handed over to the competent authority. Objects suspected of being designed to facilitate escape from a prison or endangering order and security and objects that may endanger health shall be forfeited, destroyed or handed over to the competent authority. A record of these acts shall be drawn up.”
ACCOMODATION, FURNISHINGS AND NUTRITION
Section 74
“(1)  The accommodation of inmates shall meet the required standards in terms of health, hygiene and space, including climatic conditions.
(2)  Inmates shall as a general rule be accommodated in separate rooms ...
(3)  Inmates' rooms shall be clean, dry and of adequate size. Each inmate shall have at least 4 square metres and 10 cubic metres of space in the room.
(4)  Every room ... must have daylight and artificial light ...
(5)  Penitentiaries and prisons must be equipped with sanitary facilities allowing inmates to meet their physiological needs in clean and adequate conditions, whenever they wish to do so.
(6)  Inmates shall have drinking water at their disposal at all times.”
HEALTH CARE
Section 103
“(1) Inmates shall be provided with medical treatment and regular care for their physical and mental health ...”
OBLIGATORY MEDCIAL EXAMINATION
Section 104
“...
(2) A doctor shall examine a sick or injured inmate ... and undertake all measures necessary to prevent or cure the illness and to prevent deterioration of the inmate's health.”
SPECIALIST EXAMINATION
Section 107
“(1) An inmate has the right to seek a specialist examination if such an examination has not been ordered by a prison doctor.
...”
POSTAL PARCELS
Section 126
“(1) An inmate has the right to receive a postal parcel containing authorised items at least once a month and during public holidays.
(2) The sender shall enclose a list of contents with the parcel.
(3) The parcel shall be opened and examined by a prison official in the presence of the inmate concerned.
(4) Unauthorised, stale and dangerous items shall be treated in the manner prescribed by section 60 (3) of this Act.
(5) The Prison Governor may temporarily ban reception of parcels for reasons of health or safety, of which the inmate concerned shall be informed. The inmate has the right of appeal to a judge responsible for the execution of sentences. The appeal does not have suspensive effect.”
DISCIPLINARY OFFENCES, MEASURES AND PROCEEDINGS
Section 145
“...
(2) Minor disciplinary offences are:
...
10) preventing an official or any other person involved in the implementation of the programme of execution [of prison sentences] from performing their duties;
...
(3) Grave disciplinary offences are:
...
11) possession or intake of any narcotic or psychoactive substance;
...”
DISCIPLINARY MEASURES
Section 146
“(1) Disciplinary offences are punishable with disciplinary measures.
(3) Disciplinary measures are:
1) an admonition;
2) restriction or prohibition on using money inside the prison for up to three months;
3) restriction or temporary deprivation of some or all privileges enumerated in sections 129 and 130 of this Act;
5) solitary confinement for up to twenty-one days during free time or during night and day;
...”