The case originated in an application (no. 28852/06) against the Russian Federation lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Russian national, Mr Aleksandr Mikhaylovich Andreyev (“the applicant”), on 23 May 2006.
The Russian Government (“the Government”) were represented initially by Mr A. Fedorov, Deputy Minister of Justice, and then by Mr M. Galperin, the Representative of the Russian Federation to the European Court of Human Rights.
On 24 April 2017 the Government were given notice of the complaint under Articles 6 § 1 and 13 of the Convention concerning the delayed enforcement of a domestic decision given against a municipal unitary enterprise (MUP) and the lack of any effective remedy in domestic law. The remainder of the application was declared inadmissible pursuant to Rule 54 § 3 of the Rules of Court.
The applicant was born in 1954 and lives in Kotovsk.
The applicant was a social tenant of an apartment in a four-flat apartment block under a social tenancy agreement with the local administration. In accordance with the agreement, the administration was obliged to perform maintenance and overhaul of the house and the adjacent territory, as well as a major overhaul of the flat. The applicant also had a service agreement in respect of the flat with municipal unitary enterprise Payment Processing Centre of Kotovsk (МУП “Единый расчетнокассовый центр”, “the MUP”), renamed in 2008 to Integrated Customer Service (“Служба единого заказчика”). It appears that in accordance with the service agreement the MUP was to ensure execution of the social tenancy agreement in the part concerning maintenance and overhaul.
The company was set up in accordance with a decision of the administration of Kotovsk and had a right of economic control over assets assigned to it by the owner. It provided housing and communal services in the area. It was competent, in particular, to determine the need for communal services provision and overhaul of the housing in the area; to accept living premises in the municipal housing fund; to set out quality standards for maintenance work and to supervise compliance of the works actually performed with those requirements; to organise competitions for companies providing overhaul and maintenance services; to draft and conclude standard communal services’ supply agreements; to control the compliance with the terms of the tenancy and service agreements; to collect arrears in payments of communal charges and for various maintenance works; to make proposals for tariffs for housing maintenance and overhaul. The company defined the amounts of communal charges, as well as subsidies to citizens. On behalf of the local administration it concluded service agreements with housing owners. Until 2006 the company had issued national passports to local residents.
On 14 April 2011 insolvency proceedings started in respect of the municipal unitary enterprise and on 29 March 2012 it was liquidated.
On 14 August 2001, following the applicant’s civil claim, the Kotovsk Town Court of the Tambov Region (“the Town Court”) established, without further details, that the MUP had failed to ensure technical maintenance of the housing, as well as to perform current and major overhaul of the housing. It ordered the MUP to comply with the terms of the social tenancy agreement. The judgment did not contain further clarifications. The judgment entered into force ten days later.
On 17 September 2001 the bailiffs initiated the enforcement proceedings. Subsequently, on several occasions (15 September 2004, 21 April 2006, 2 March 2007, and 16 August 2008) they concluded that the respondent company failed to comply with the judgment, as the leaking roof had not been repaired, the basement was constantly flooded and the humidity was excessive, and the house had remained inaccessible through the adjacent yard.
On 14 April 2003 the applicant’s family privatised the apartment.
In reply to the bailiffs’ requests for clarification of the judgment of 14 August 2001, by separate decisions of 22 December 2004 and 27 April 2006 the Town Court confirmed that the social tenancy agreement remained in force and held that the judgment had to be further executed despite the privatisation of the flat.
In 2008 the company claimed to have the social tenancy agreement discontinued. The applicant and his family members brought proceedings against both the unitary enterprise and the Kotovsk Town Administration seeking to have the flat repaired, and further claimed compensation for damage and penalty from the MUP.
According to the expert examination report of 1 August 2008 commissioned by the Town Court, the apartment block was “44%‒dilapidated”. The applicant’s flat was suitable for living. The major overhaul of the flat in so far as the flooding was concerned was technically impossible as it required maintenance works in respect of the entire house. The expert further established that since some date before 2003 major repairs of the floor and the windows had been necessary in the applicant’s flat. The expert determined the list of works and their price.
On 3 February 2009 the Town Court granted the company’s claim to terminate the social tenancy agreement. The court further rejected the applicant’s claim for compensation and a penalty against the MUP and the claim to oblige the Town Administration to perform repairs of the apartment block, the apartment and the adjacent land plot.
On 18 May 2009 the Tambov Regional Court upheld the judgment, except for the decision to reject the claim against the administration to have the apartment repaired. In this part the Regional Court sent the case for a fresh examination.
On 24 August 2009 the Town Court observed that the need for a major overhaul of the applicant’s flat was established on the basis of the expert reports and had not been discharged by the landlord, that is the local administration, by the time of privatisation. The court further rejected some of the applicant’s submissions concerning the scope of works to be performed as insufficiently substantiated, and redefined the list of the required works on the basis of the expert report (see paragraph 13 above). It accordingly obliged the Kotovsk Town Administration to perform major repairs of the floor and the windows in the applicant’s apartment.
By a separate decision of 24 August 2009 the court discontinued the proceedings in respect of the unitary enterprise as substantially the same as those of 3 February and 18 May 2009 (see paragraphs 14 and 15 above).
The administration appealed, arguing that it was not under an obligation to repair the flat, as it was not a party to the social tenancy agreement which had been concluded with the MUP, and, in any event, after the privatisation it was for the applicant to perform his flat’s capital maintenance.
On 21 October 2009 the Tambov Regional Court upheld the judgment of 24 August 2009 on appeal. With reference to Article 19 of the Privatisation of Housing Act (see paragraph 22 below) the court found that the administration was liable to perform the works as the former landlord.
On 30 November 2010 the bailiff responsible for the enforcement of the judgment of 24 August 2009 terminated the proceedings due to actual execution. The parties have not submitted any information showing that the applicant contested the enforcement of this judgment before the national courts.
The domestic provisions relevant to cases on the legal status of State and municipal unitary enterprises with the right of economic control are summarised in Liseytseva and Maslov v. Russia (nos. 39483/05 and 40527/10, §§ 54-127, 9 October 2014).
Article 16 of the Privatisation of Housing Act (Law no. 1541-I of 4 July 1991, as in force at the material time) provided that privatisation of living premises requiring a major overhaul (требующих капитального ремонта) was to be conducted in accordance with the Act. The former landlord remained under obligation to perform the major overhaul of a house in accordance with the norms on maintenance, exploitation and overhaul of the housing fund.