The case originated in two applications (nos. 3473/11 and 75381/11) against the Republic of Cyprus lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by Mr Nawaf Mefaalani, a Syrian national who was born in 1973. Application no. 3473/11 was lodged on 23 December 2010. Application no. 75381/11 was lodged on 14 November 2011.
The applicant was represented by Mr C. P. Christodoulides, a lawyer practising in Nicosia. The Cypriot Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, the Attorney-General, Mr C. Clerides.
The applicant’s principal complaints were first, that his detention pending deportation was unlawful and thus in violation of Article 5 § 1 of the Convention, and second, that he did not have an effective remedy to challenge his detention, in violation of Article 5 § 4 of the Convention.
On 9 July 2014 the complaints under Article 5 §§ 1 and 4 were communicated to the Government and the remainder of the application was declared inadmissible pursuant to Rule 54 § 3 of the Rules of Court.
The applicant first visited Cyprus in 1991. He married a Cypriot national in 1993. As a result of this marriage he obtained Cypriot nationality in September 2000. Two years later the applicant divorced his wife and married his second wife, a Syrian national. He and the Syrian national divorced in 2005.
On 10 March 2006 the Council of Ministers informed the applicant of its intention to deprive him of his Cypriot citizenship. Following a request by the applicant an investigative committee was set up. The applicant was also heard by the committee as part of the investigation.
On 8 July 2007 the applicant married his third wife, a Cypriot national, in Syria.
On 23 July 2007, on the basis of the report of the investigative committee, the Council of Ministers decided to deprive the applicant of his Cypriot nationality on public interest grounds, pursuant to section 113 of the Census Bureau Law of 2002 (see relevant domestic law and practice at paragraph 37 below). The report concluded that the applicant had been involved in cigarette trafficking and in the trafficking of illegal immigrants between Syria and Cyprus.
The applicant filed a recourse with the Supreme Court (revisional jurisdiction) seeking the annulment of the Council of Minister’s decision (recourse no. 1226/07). This recourse was dismissed at first instance on 7 May 2008. On 2 June 2008 the applicant appealed against the Supreme Court’s decision (appeal no. 82/08). The appeal was dismissed by the plenary court on 12 May 2011: see paragraph 18 below.
On 25 August 2010 deportation and detention orders were issued against the applicant. These were served on the applicant on 22 September 2010 while he was in hospital recovering from a road accident. He was detained the same day. The next day, at the applicant’s request, he was transferred to a private hospital and remained under police custody until his discharge from the hospital on 21 October 2010. After that he was detained at a police station in Pera Chorio Nisou (Nicosia District) and was transferred to the hospital on various occasions, where he remained in police custody.
On 24 September 2010 the applicant filed a recourse with the Supreme Court (revisional jurisdiction) against the deportation and detention orders (recourse no. 1303/10). The same day, the applicant filed a request for a provisional order seeking the suspension of his deportation and an order for his release. These recourse proceedings were then adjourned pending the outcome of the appeal concerning the removal of his citizenship (appeal no. 82/08, see paragraph 9 above).
On 30 September 2010, further to a complaint by the applicant’s wife to the Commissioner for Administration (the Ombudsman), the Ombudsman asked the Minister of Interior to suspend the applicant’s deportation because of his poor health and until she had completed an investigation. That investigation was completed on 27 October 2010 when the Ombudsman concluded that she did not have the authority to investigate the matter further as court proceedings were pending.
On 16 December 2010, the applicant withdrew his application for suspension of his deportation because he had decided to leave Cyprus voluntarily. It appears that the applicant took this decision because he had been in detention for too long.
On 20 December 2010, the applicant, whilst in detention, received a letter from the Civil Registry and Migration Department requesting payment, before his deportation, of EUR 30,356 for detention expenses as well as EUR 1,200 for the legal costs incurred in recourse no. 1226/07 (the appeal against removal of citizenship: see paragraph 9 above). The EUR 30,356 was broken down as follows: (i) EUR 20,675 for the salaries of the police officers who guarded him when he was in hospital; EUR 2,650 as expenses for his detention and maintenance at the police detention facilities for fifty-three days; and EUR 5,831 representing 25% of administrative fees. In his submissions to the Court, the applicant alleges that the authorities refused to allow him to leave Cyprus unless he paid the sums requested. He did not and claims that he thus remained in detention.
On 31 December 2010, the applicant applied to the Supreme Court for a writ of habeas corpus (application no. 155/2010). He argued that after 20 December 2010 his detention had been illegally prolonged as it was made conditional upon payment of the detention expenses.
On 29 January 2011 the applicant was deported to Syria.
On 4 February 2011, in light of the applicant’s deportation, counsel for the applicant withdrew the habeas corpus application which had been made on 31 December 2010 (see paragraph 15 above).
The Supreme Court dismissed the applicant’s appeal against the removal of his citizenship (appeal no. 82/08) on 12 May 2011. The applicant maintains that his representatives were notified of this judgment on 30 May 2011.
On 28 November 2012, the applicant withdrew his recourse against the deportation and detention orders (recourse no. 1303/10).
The applicant returned to Cyprus on 20 March 2012. He then married his third wife (that is, the woman he had already married in Syria in 2007: see paragraph 7 above).
On 21 April 2012 the applicant applied for a residence permit. The Civil Registry and Migration Department refused this application on 11 June 2012, stating that it considered the applicant a threat to public order for the same reasons for which he had been deprived of Cypriot nationality and then deported on 29 January 2011. The applicant was asked to leave the country. The applicant lodged a recourse against this decision, which the Supreme Court rejected on 3 February 2015, finding that refusal of the residence permit was lawful and disclosed no breach of the Convention.
On 24 October 2013, the Civil Registry and Migration Department commenced proceedings in the Nicosia District Court for payment of the detention expenses, which, as it considered, were still owed by the applicant (see paragraph 14 above). That claim was withdrawn on 31 July 2015.
The right to liberty and security of person is safeguarded under Article 11 which, where relevant, at the material time provided:
“1. Everyone has the right to liberty and security of person.
No person shall be deprived of his liberty save in the following cases when and as provided by law:-
...
(f) the arrest or detention of a person to prevent him effecting an unauthorised entry into the territory of the Republic or of an alien against whom action is being taken with a view to deportation or extradition.
...
Every person who is deprived of his liberty by arrest or detention shall be entitled to take proceedings by which the lawfulness of his detention shall be decided speedily by a court and his release ordered if the detention is not lawful.
....”
Deportation and detention orders can be challenged before the Supreme Court by way of administrative recourse under Article 146(1) of the Constitution of the Republic of Cyprus. This provision provides as follows:
“The Supreme Constitutional Court shall have exclusive jurisdiction to adjudicate finally on a recourse made to it on a complaint that a decision, an act or omission of any organ, authority or person, exercising any executive or administrative authority is contrary to any of the provisions of this Constitution or of any law or is made in excess or in abuse of powers vested in such organ or authority or person.”
Upon such a recourse the Court may, by its decision (a) confirm, either in whole or in part, such decision or act or omission; or (b) declare, either in whole or in part, such decision or act to be null and void and of no effect whatsoever, or (c) declare that such omission, either in whole or in part, ought not to have been made and that whatever has been omitted should have been performed (Article 146(4)).
The Supreme Court has exclusive jurisdiction to issue orders of habeas corpus (Article 155(4) of the Constitution).
.  The entry, residence and expulsion of aliens are regulated by the Aliens and Immigration Law of 1959 (Cap. 105).
Section 4 of the Law allows the Minister to delegate the execution of his duties or other powers granted under this Law to any other official in his or her department.
Under section 6(1) of the above Law a person is not permitted to enter the Republic if he is a “prohibited immigrant”. A prohibited immigrant can be ordered to leave the Republic under section 13 of the same Law.
The Director of the Civil Registry and Migration Department has power under the Law to order the deportation and, in the meantime, the detention of any alien who is a prohibited immigrant under the Law’s provisions (section 14).
Directive 2008/115/EC on common standards and procedures in Member States for returning illegally staying third-country nationals (“the Return Directive”) took direct effect in Cyprus when the two-year deadline for its transposition expired on 24 December 2010.
Article 15 of the Directive provides:
“Detention
Unless other sufficient but less coercive measures can be applied effectively in a specific case, Member States may only keep in detention a third-country national who is the subject of return procedures in order to prepare the return and/or carry out the removal process, in particular when:
(a) there is a risk of absconding or
(b) the third-country national concerned avoids or hampers the preparation of return or the removal process.
Any detention shall be for as short a period as possible and only maintained as long as removal arrangements are in progress and executed with due diligence.
Detention shall be ordered by administrative or judicial authorities.
Detention shall be ordered in writing with reasons being given in fact and in law.
When detention has been ordered by administrative authorities, Member States shall:
(a) either provide for a speedy judicial review of the lawfulness of detention to be decided on as speedily as possible from the beginning of detention;
(b) or grant the third-country national concerned the right to take proceedings by means of which the lawfulness of detention shall be subject to a speedy judicial review to be decided on as speedily as possible after the launch of the relevant proceedings. In such a case Member States shall immediately inform the third-country national concerned about the possibility of taking such proceedings.
The third-country national concerned shall be released immediately if the detention is not lawful.
In every case, detention shall be reviewed at reasonable intervals of time either on application by the third-country national concerned or ex officio. In the case of prolonged detention periods, reviews shall be subject to the supervision 	of a judicial authority.
When it appears that a reasonable prospect of removal no longer exists for legal or other considerations or the conditions laid down in paragraph 1 no longer exist, detention ceases to be justified and the person concerned shall be released immediately.
Detention shall be maintained for as long a period as the conditions laid down in paragraph 1 are fulfilled and it is necessary to ensure successful removal. Each Member State shall set a limited period of detention, which may not exceed six months.
Member States may not extend the period referred to in paragraph 5 except for a limited period not exceeding a further twelve months in accordance with national law in cases where regardless of all their reasonable efforts the removal operation is likely to last longer owing to:
(a) a lack of cooperation by the third-country national concerned, or
(b) delays in obtaining the necessary documentation from third countries.”
The provisions of Article 15 were subsequently transposed into Cypriot law by a series of amendments to the Aliens and Immigration Law which took effect on 25 November 2011.
Section 18ΠΣT(1) transposed Article 15(1) of the Return Directive in virtually identical terms, providing that it is for the Minister of Interior to issue the relevant detention order.
Sections 18ΠΣT(4) and 18ΠΣT(5) transposed Article 15(3) of the Return Directive and provide that a detention order shall be reviewed every two months or within a reasonable time and that the length of detention may be reviewed by the Supreme Court in the course of an application for a writ of habeas corpus.
Section 18ΠΣT(7), which transposed Article 15(5) of the Return Directive, provides that, as a general rule, the period of detention cannot exceed six months.
Under section 113(2) and (5) of the above Law, the Council of Ministers may deprive a person of his or her Cypriot citizenship if it is satisfied that first, citizenship has been acquired through fraud, false representation or concealment of a substantial fact and second, that maintaining the individual’s citizenship is against the public interest. Before an order for removal of citizenship is made the individual has the right to an investigation (section 113(6)).
The legality of deportation and detention orders can only be challenged before the Supreme Court by way of a recourse brought under Article 146 of the Constitution (see paragraphs 24 and 25 above) and not in the context of a habeas corpus application. This is because the issue of legality of detention under administrative orders falls within the scope of administrative law (see, for example, the Supreme Court’s judgment of 30 December 2004 in Elena Bondar, appeal no. 12166 against the refusal of an application for a writ of habeas corpus, (2004) 1 (C) CLR 2075).
However, in the context of a habeas corpus application, the Supreme Court can examine the legality of an individual’s detention for the purposes of deportation if it appears that detention which was initially lawful subsequently has become unlawful by exceeding a reasonably permissible length (see Essa Murad Khlaief (2003) 1 (C) CLR 1402).
A recourse under Article 146 does not have automatic suspensive effect under domestic law. In order to suspend deportation, an application for a provisional order must be made. A provisional order is an exceptional, discretionary measure and is decided on a case-by-case basis (Rule 13 of the Supreme Constitutional Court Rules 1962). The Supreme Court will grant a provisional order if an applicant establishes that the contested decision is tainted by flagrant illegality or that he or she will suffer irreparable damage from its enforcement (see among other authorities, Stavros Loizides v. the Ministry of Foreign Affairs (1995) 3 C.L.R. 233; Elpida Krokidou and others v. the Republic, (1990) 3C C.L.R. 1857; and Sydney Alfred Moyo & another v. the Republic (1988) 3 CLR 1203).