The present case was referred to the Court by the European Commission of Human Rights ("the Commission") on 12 October 1983, within the period of three months laid down by Article 32 para. 1 and Article 47 (art. 32-1, art. 47) of the Convention. The case originated in an application (no. 8734/79) against the Federal Republic of Germany lodged with the Commission on 13 July 1979 under Article 25 (art. 25) by a national of that State, Dr. Sigurd Barthold, a veterinary surgeon.
The Commission’s request refers to Articles 44 and 48 (art. 44, art. 48) and to the declaration whereby the Federal Republic of Germany recognised the compulsory jurisdiction of the Court (Article 46) (art. 46). The purpose of the request was to obtain a decision as to whether the facts of the case disclose a breach by the respondent State of its obligations under Article 10 (art. 10) of the Convention.
In response to the inquiry made in accordance with Rule 33 para. 3 (d) of the Rules of Court, Dr. Barthold stated that he wished to take part in the proceedings pending before the Court and designated the lawyer who would represent him (Rule 30).
The Chamber of seven judges to be constituted included, as ex officio members, Mr. R. Bernhardt, the elected judge of German nationality (Article 43 of the Convention) (art. 43), and Mr. G. Wiarda, the President of the Court (Rule 21 para. 3 (b)). On 27 October 1983, the President of the Court drew by lot, in the presence of the Registrar, the names of the five other members, namely Mr. Thór Vilhjálmsson, Mrs. D. Bindschedler-Robert, Mr. E. Garcia de Enterria, Mr. L.-E. Pettiti and Mr. J. Gersing (Article 43 in fine of the Convention and Rule 21 para. 4) (art. 43), Rule 21-4). Mr. C. Russo, substitute judge, subsequently replaced Mr. E. Garcia de Enterria, who was prevented from taking part in the consideration of the case (Rule 22 para. 1 and Rule 24 para. 1).
Having assumed the office of President of the Chamber (Rule 21 para. 5), Mr. Wiarda consulted, through the Deputy Registrar, the Agent of the German Government ("the Government"), the Commission’s Delegate and the lawyer for the applicant regarding the need for a written procedure (Rule 37 para. 1). On 8 December, he directed that the Agent and the applicant’s lawyer should each have until 1 March 1984 to file a memorial and that the Delegate should be entitled to reply in writing within two months from the date of the transmission to him by the Registrar of whichever of the aforesaid memorials should last be filed.
The President twice extended the time-limit accorded to the Agent: on 21 February until 30 March, and then on 5 April until 11 May.
On 21 February, the President granted the applicant’s lawyer leave to use the German language (Rule 27 para. 3).
The memorial of the applicant was received at the registry on 21 February, and that of the Government on 11 May.
Acceding to a request by the Government, the President decided on 14 May that a document submitted by the Agent on 11 May should be neither published nor made available to the public.
On 18 May, the Agent communicated several other documents to the Registrar.
On 11 July, the Secretary to the Commission informed the Registrar that the Delegate would present his observations at the hearings.
On 12 July, the President set 23 October as the date for the opening of the oral proceedings, having first consulted the Agent of the Government, the Delegate of the Commission and the lawyer for the applicant through the Deputy Registrar (Rule 38). On 2 October, he gave leave for those appearing on behalf of the Government to use the German language at the hearings (Rule 27 para. 2).
On various dates between 24 July and 18 October, the Commission, the applicant and the Government, as the case may be, lodged a number of documents and submissions with the registry, either at the request of the President or of their own motion.
The hearings took place in public on 23 October 1984 at the Human Rights Building in . The Court had held a preparatory meeting immediately beforehand.
There appeared before the Court:
- for the Government
- for the Commission
- for the applicant
The Court heard addresses by Mrs. Maier for the Government, by Mr. Ermacora for the Commission and by Mr. Eyl for the applicant, as well as their replies to its questions. During the course of the hearings, the Agent of the Government submitted several documents to the Court.
Dr. Barthold, who was born in 1926, is a veterinary surgeon practising in Hamburg-Fuhlsbüttel. In 1978 and until March 1980, his practice operated as a "veterinary clinic", of which there were eight in  at the time. He closed down this clinic on 5 March 1980 but subsequently re-opened it on 1 January 1983.
By virtue of the Hamburg Veterinary Surgeons’ Council Act of 26 June 1964 (Tierärztekammergesetz - "the 1964 Act"), the applicant is a member of the Hamburg Veterinary Surgeons’ Council, whose task, among other things, is to ensure that its members comply with their professional obligations (section 1 and section 3 sub-section no. 2 of the 1964 Act). These obligations are laid down principally in the Rules of Professional Conduct of Hamburg Veterinary Surgeons (Berufsordnung der Hamburger Tierärzteschaft - "the Rules of Professional Conduct"), which were promulgated on 16 January 1970 by the Council in pursuance of section 8 sub-section 1 no. 1 of the 1964 Act and approved on 10 February 1970 by the Government (Senat) of the Land of Hamburg (section 8 sub-section 3).
As the director and proprietor of a clinic, Dr. Barthold provided a round-the-clock emergency service (Rule 19 of the Rules of Professional Conduct and Regulation 2 of the Regulations of 27 August 1975 on the Establishment of Veterinary Clinics - Richtlinien zur Einrichtung von tierärztlichen Kliniken; see also paragraph 29 below). This was not necessarily the case as far as other veterinary surgeons were concerned (praktische Tierärzte - see paragraph 28 below).
From 1974 onwards, the applicant - who was one of the authors of the above-mentioned Regulations and who had insisted on the provision of a round-the-clock service by clinics - advocated within the Council that a regular night service involving the participation, by rota, of all veterinary surgeons should be organised. However, the majority of his colleagues voted on two occasions, on 19 December 1974 and 7 December 1979, against such a proposal (see also paragraph 28 below).
On 24 August 1978, there appeared in the daily newspaper Hamburger Abendblatt an article signed by Mrs. B, a journalist, and entitled "Tierärzte ab 20 Uhr schwer erreichbar - Warum ‘Shalen’ die Nacht doch noch überlebte" ("Veterinary surgeons hard to reach after 8 p.m. - why "Shalen" managed to survive the night after all").
The article, 146 lines and 4 columns long, comprised an introductory paragraph and in brackets, in bolder type, the three following sub-heads: "Auf eine spätere Zeit vertröstet" ("Put off until later"), "Unfreundliche Absage" ("Unfriendly refusal") and "Zur Not hilft die Polizei" ("Police to the rescue").
The introductory paragraph, in bold type, read as follows:
"When the owner of a domestic pet needs help at night for his beloved animal, he may often become desperate: not one veterinary surgeon can be contacted. This state of affairs ought now to improve. There are plans to bring in a new Act on veterinary surgeons, along the lines of the  legislation governing doctors. According to Dr. Jürgen Arndt, veterinary surgeon and Chairman of the Hamburg Land Association which is part of the Federal Association of Veterinary Surgeons (Bundesverband praktischer Tierärzte e.V.), ‘it will also regulate the emergency night service’. At present, it is true, a few clinics voluntarily provide an emergency service from time to time, and [other] veterinary surgeons also help, but this is not on a regular basis and does not give pet-owners security. They only do it voluntarily."
The journalist writing the article began by recounting the efforts made by the owners of the cat "Shalen" to find a veterinary surgeon prepared to help them one evening between 7.30 and 10.00 p.m. After telephoning in vain to two veterinary practices and to the emergency service, apparently they at last struck lucky: "Dr. Barthold, director of the Fuhlsbüttel veterinary clinic, intervened". The journalist then quoted the applicant as saying: "It was high time; ... [the cat] would not have survived the night."
According to the author, Mrs. B, the particular case disclosed a problem, namely the inadequacy of the emergency service, at least on weekdays between 8 p.m. and 8 a.m. There followed a passage which read:
"‘I think that in a big city such as  there ought to be a regular service for attending to animals’, Dr. Sigurd Barthold emphasised.
’s animal lovers" - added the journalist, summarising her interview with Dr. Barthold - "would then no longer have to get sore fingers trying to ring up veterinary surgeons, looking for one who is prepared to help. In that case it would not only be the clinics which would voluntarily be on emergency duty round the clock; each of the 53 practising veterinary surgeons would be on night duty once a month if arrangements were made for two of them to be on duty each night.
The fact that there is a demand for an emergency service at night-time is illustrated by Dr. Barthold by reference to the number of calls received by his practice between 8 p.m. and 8 a.m.: ‘Our telephone rings between two and twelve times each night. Of course these are not all emergency cases. Sometimes advice over the telephone is all that is needed.’"
The author concluded the article by presenting under the third sub-head comments of Dr. Jürgen Arndt, "Vice-Chairman of the Hamburg Veterinary Surgeons’ Council and himself director of a clinic in Harburg". Believing that an emergency service organised on a rota basis "would not release clinics from dispensing their voluntary service but would lessen the strain on them", Dr. Arndt said that he was actively trying to promote such a service. He added that the appropriate  authorities envisaged drafting the Act on veterinary surgeons during the fourth quarter of the year. Until it came into force, owners of animals would have to call one veterinary surgeon after another - or else the police, who would normally be prepared to help them.
The article was illustrated by two photographs. The larger, centrally placed, showed a cat and had the caption: "Um das Leben der kleinen ‘Shalen’ wurde gekämpft - erfolgreich" ("They fought for the life of little ‘Shalen’ - and won"). The second one was an identity photograph which appeared alongside the title and introductory paragraph of the article; it was a photograph of the applicant, though its caption erroneously gave the name of Dr. Arndt.
Below the photograph of the cat and outside the space occupied by the article, there was a short text under the heading "Hamburg - Stadt der Tiere" ("Hamburg - city of animals"), giving the number of domestic pets, veterinary surgeons and veterinary clinics in Hamburg and the telephone number of the emergency service available at weekends and on public holidays.
On 25 August 1978, the Hamburger Abendblatt once again published the applicant’s photograph under the heading "Unter dem Foto ein falscher Name" ("Wrong name under photo"), together with the following explanation: "An error crept into our report yesterday on the emergency veterinary service. Unfortunately, the wrong name appeared under the photograph. The person in question is in fact Dr. Sigurd Barthold, director of the Fulhsbüttel veterinary clinic."
A number of Dr. Barthold’s fellow practitioners, who regarded the article in question as publicity conflicting with the Rules of Professional Conduct, referred the matter to the association "PRO HONORE - Verein für Treu und Glauben im Geschäftsleben e.V." ("Pro Honore Association for fairness and trustworthiness in business" - "Pro Honore"). This association was founded in 1925 by the businessmen of Hamburg and exists in order to "ensure honesty and good faith in all spheres of business life" and "in particular to combat unfair competition, fraud in connection with moneylending and corruption" (article 2 of the Charter of 26 September 1979).
Between 1978 and 30 September 1980, Pro Honore was operating simultaneously as a branch organisation of the Zentrale zur Bekämpfung unlauteren Wettbewerbs e.V. Frankfurt-am-Main (the Frankfurt-am-Main Central Agency for Combatting Unfair Competition - "the Central Agency"). The latter has been active for decades in curbing unfair competition, and counts among its members all the chambers of industry, trade and crafts and some 400 other associations, including the Federal Association of Veterinary Surgeons. The Hamburg Veterinary Surgeons’ Council and the Deutsche Tierärzteschaft e.V, which is the umbrella organisation of the councils and private associations of veterinary surgeons, are not members of the Agency.
Under section 13 of the Unfair Competition Act of 7 June 1909 (Gesetz gegen den unlauteren Wettbewerb - "the 1909 Act"), Pro Honore and the Central Agency are empowered to bring against anyone engaged in business proceedings to restrain that person from breaking certain rules set forth in the Act.
On 4 September 1978, Pro Honore wrote to the applicant to say that it had been informed by certain veterinary surgeons that he had "instigated or tolerated, in the Hamburger Abendblatt of 24 August 1978, publicity on [his] own behalf". The letter went on to quote extracts from the article in question. The applicant was said to have thereby infringed section 1 of the 1909 Act in conjunction with Rule 7 of the Rules of Professional Conduct.
Section 1 of the 1909 Act stipulates that: "Any person who in the course of business commits, for purposes of competition, acts contrary to honest practices (gute Sitten) may be enjoined from further engaging in those acts (Unterlassung) and held liable in damages."
Rule 7 of the Rules of Professional Conduct deals with advertising and publicity (Werbung und Anpreisung) and reads as follows:
"It is contrary to the ethics of the profession (standeswidrig):
Pro Honore asserted its right to bring proceedings against the applicant for unfair competition (section 13 sub-section 1 of the 1909 Act) and called on him, for the purposes of a friendly settlement of the matter, to sign an enclosed declaration. Under the terms of this declaration, he would undertake not to make publicity on his own behalf by instigating or tolerating press articles such as that which had appeared in the Hamburger Abendblatt, to pay the Central Agency 1000 DM for each infringement and to pay Pro Honore 120 DM by way of costs incurred in asserting its right (Rechtsverfolgung).
A lawyer replied two days later on behalf of the applicant. The request made to Dr. Barthold was, he wrote, very close to blackmail. It was presumptuous (Zumutung) to speak of unlawful publicity. The reproaches directed against his client, who had not instigated the article complained of, had done considerable damage to his personal and professional reputation.
The applicant’s lawyer asked Pro Honore to confirm in writing that it would be dropping its claim against his client, withdrawing its accusations and expressing regret. He also asked for reimbursement of his costs and announced that he would sue Pro Honore if it failed to meet his demands within three days.
The Central Agency then applied to the  (Landgericht) for an interim injunction (Articles 936 and 944 of the Code of Civil Procedure).
An interim injunction was issued on 15 September 1978 by the presiding judge of the 15th Civil Chamber. This decision forbade the applicant
"to report in the press (except in professional journals), giving his full name, a photograph of himself and an indication of his occupation as director of the Fuhlsbüttel veterinary clinic, that at least on working days between 8 p.m. and 8 a.m., animal lovers in Hamburg would get sore fingers from trying to telephone veterinary surgeons ready to help them, in conjunction with (in Verbindung mit)
and/or to contribute to such reports by giving journalists information".
For each and every breach of the injunction, he was liable to a maximum fine (Ordnungsgeld) of 500,000 DM or non-criminal imprisonment (Ordnungshaft) of up to six months, the precise penalty to be fixed by the court.
The applicant lodged an objection (Widerspruch) against this injunction (Articles 936 and 924 of the Code of Civil Procedure). The competent Chamber of the  upheld the injunction, however, on 15 November 1978. He thereupon entered an appeal which was dismissed on 22 March 1979 by the 3rd Chamber (Senat) of the Hanseatic Court of Appeal (Hanseatisches Oberlandesgericht). Finally, on 2 July 1979, the Federal Constitutional Court (Bundesverfassungsgericht), sitting as a bench of three judges, decided not to entertain the constitutional application he had brought against the latter judgment and the interim injunction of 15 September 1978, on the ground that the application did not offer sufficient prospects of success.
Before completion of the proceedings relating to the interim injunction, Dr. Barthold had asked the Regional Court to set a time-limit within which the Central Agency should commence the action as to the main issue (Articles 936 and 926 of the Code of Civil Procedure); whereupon the Agency instituted the necessary proceedings on 22 December 1978. Its statement of claim was couched in the same terms as the prohibitory injunction issued by the  on 15 September 1978 (see paragraph 18 above).
On 20 July 1979, the 16th Commercial Chamber of the  found in favour of the defendant.
The  rejected certain objections raised by him as to the Agency’s right of action. Nor did it accept his argument that the plaintiff, in complaining of an infringement of section 1 of the 1909 Act, could not rely upon Rule 7, paragraph (a), of the Rules of Professional Conduct.
On the other hand, the  was satisfied that the evidence adduced did not support the charge of infringing the rules governing competition (Wettbewerbsverstoss). It had not been established that the applicant had influenced to an appreciable extent or tolerated the publication complained of. In fact, there were important indications pointing in the opposite direction. The author of the article had declared that Dr. Barthold’s name had been mentioned without his knowledge. It could be inferred from her testimony that the applicant had not asked for his identity to be divulged and must have expected not to find mention of it in the newspaper. He might thus have believed - as indeed he asserted - that the Hamburger Abendblatt would do no more than discuss the deplorable situation brought about by the absence of a night service. In addition, it was quite possible that the article in question, instigated by the journalist, was not based solely on the interview with Dr. Barthold and that the newspaper or the journalist had included the name of Dr. Barthold and of his clinic so as to emphasise the difference between the latter - praiseworthy - clinic and other less helpful veterinary surgeons. The question whether the applicant had taken care, or at least endeavoured, to prevent his name and clinic being given prominence over his fellow practitioners had been impossible to elucidate - and this should not operate to Dr. Barthold’s detriment - as the journalist had refused to give any further evidence, on the justified ground that she was not obliged to disclose her sources.
On 24 January 1980, the Hanseatic Court of Appeal, after declaring admissible the appeal brought by the Central Agency, upheld the Agency’s grounds of appeal, which reiterated the terms of the injunction granted on 15 September 1978 (see paragraphs 18 and 20 above).
The Court of Appeal held in the first place that the applicant had infringed Rule 7, paragraph (a), of the Rules of Professional Conduct, a legally valid (formell rechtmässig) provision that was in conformity with the Basic Law as well as other superior rules of law. That Rule did not unreasonably limit Dr. Barthold’s right to freedom of expression as guaranteed by Article 5 of the Basic Law, for there was nothing to prevent him from freely stating his opinion and in particular from criticising deplorable situations, even if this had the inevitable effect of producing publicity favourable to himself. The Agency was not seeking to restrain Dr. Barthold from making public pronouncements about veterinary assistance. Its application was concerned solely with a given form of conduct comprising - "cumulatively!" - several aspects: the giving of Dr. Barthold’s full name, the reproduction of his photograph, the mention of his being director of the Fuhlsbüttel veterinary clinic and the statement that, at least between 8 p.m. and 8 a.m. on working days, animal lovers in Hamburg would get sore fingers trying to telephone a veterinary surgeon willing to help them, plus one of the three assertions set out in the Agency’s grounds of appeal (and, previously, in the interim injunction of 15 September 1978 - see paragraph 18 above).
Objectively, the article complained of entailed publicity for Dr. Barthold: compared to other veterinary surgeons, it presented him as an exemplary practitioner, thereby being particularly likely to incite the owners of sick animals to turn to his clinic. Such publicity exceeded the bounds of objective comment on matters of justified concern for the applicant. If in the future he were to supply the press with information necessary for the writing of an article, he should, in order to avoid any infringement of Rule 7, paragraph (a), of the Rules of Professional Conduct, ensure beforehand that the text to be published did not involve any unlawful publicity or advertising, by reserving a right of correction or by agreeing on the form of the article with the journalist.
In the view of the Hanseatic Court of Appeal, the respondent had at the same time contravened section 1 of the 1909 Act. His intention of enhancing his own competitivity to the detriment of his competitors was to be presumed in the case of this type of publication, and that presumption was not rebutted in the circumstances. It mattered little (unerheblich) that he may additionally or even primarily have been pursuing other objectives, as there was an act done for the purposes of commercial competition as long as the intent to stimulate such competition had not been entirely overriden by other motives ("nicht völlig hinter sonstigen Beweggründen verschwindet").
As for the risk of repetition, also presumed in this matter, there were no grounds for concluding that this was non-existent. Contrary to what the  had found, the applicant had knowingly and substantially contributed to the publication which highlighted his person and his clinic. It was true that the press had itself taken up the case of "Shalen" and had invited Dr. Barthold to comment only after being informed of the incident by the animal’s owner. However, the applicant had, by his interview, greatly influenced the content of the article and, what was more, had authorised a photograph to be taken of himself. He had thereby provided the opportunity for producing the article in question, with its character of publicity.
He could not have been unaware of this risk and the Rules of Professional Conduct required him to ensure that the text to be published did not involve illegal publicity favourable to himself, by reserving a right of correction or by agreeing on the form of publication with the journalist. He could also have made an arrangement with Mrs. B to remain anonymous, although he was in no way obliged to express his views without disclosing his identity.
In fact, the respondent had acknowledged in his written pleadings of 13 December 1978 and 12 January 1979 that he had authorised the inclusion of his name and photograph. Although he retracted those statements on 29 March and 6 April 1979, he had not shown that he had insisted on publication without inclusion of such details. The testimony of the journalist was not conclusive on this point. It was not necessary to take evidence from Dr. Arndt, because Dr. Barthold had unquestionably allowed photographs to be taken. That being so, he ought not to have contented himself with obtaining a verbal promise - as he claimed to have done - that he would not himself appear in one of the photographs. Whilst he claimed to have told the journalist that the Rules of Professional Conduct prohibited advertising and publicity, he was wrong to have passed on to her the responsibility of writing an article which complied with those Rules.
The danger of repetition persisted notwithstanding the time that had elapsed. The "Shalen" affair was no longer topical, but the press was likely to come back to the issues it had raised, by making reference to this incident along with others, after another interview with Dr. Barthold.
The Court of Appeal decided finally not to give leave to appeal on points of law against its judgment: the latter did not depart from the established case-law of the Federal Court of Justice (Bundesgerichtshof), and the case did not raise questions of principle.
Dr. Barthold challenged the judgment of 24 January 1980 before the . He repeated various arguments on which he had based his constitutional application in the interim proceedings (see paragraph 19 above), namely non-observance of equality before the law, of freedom of expression and of freedom to practise a profession, as safeguarded by Articles 3, 5 and 12 of the Basic Law, and incompatibility of the obligation to belong to the Veterinary Surgeons’ Council with freedom of association, as guaranteed by Article 9 of the Basic Law. In addition, he alleged violation of his right to be heard, in particular by a legally competent court (gesetzlicher Richter). On this latter point, he claimed that it was not within the province of the civil courts to apply the Rules of Professional Conduct.
The , sitting as a bench of three judges, dismissed the constitutional application on 6 October 1980, on the ground that it lacked sufficient prospects of success.
In the Federal Republic of Germany, veterinary medicine is governed partly by federal law and partly by the law of the Länder. The principal rules relevant to the present case are to be found in the Federal Veterinary Practitioners Act (Bundes-Tierärzteordnung, in the version of 22 August 1977 - "the Federal Act"), the Hamburg Act of 26 June 1964 on the Veterinary Surgeons’ Council ("the 1964 Act" - see paragraph 11 above), the Hamburg Act on Disciplinary Tribunals for the Medical Professions (Gesetz über die Berufsgerichtsbarkeit der Heilberufe, in the version of 20 June 1972 - "the 1972 Act"), the Rules of Professional Conduct of 16 January 1970 (see paragraph 11 above) and the Regulations on the establishment of veterinary clinics (see paragraphs 12 above and 29 below).
The profession of veterinary surgeon is not an industrial, commercial or craft occupation (Gewerbe) but, by its nature, a liberal profession (section 1(2) of the Federal Act). According to sub-section 1 of section 1 of the Federal Act,
"It shall be the task of the veterinary surgeon to prevent, alleviate and cure suffering and disease in animals, to contribute to the maintenance and development of productive livestock, to protect man from the dangers and harm arising from animal disease and from foodstuffs and products of animal origin, and to endeavour to improve the quality of foodstuffs of animal origin".
In order to be able to practise on a permanent basis, an authorisation (Approbation) issued by the appropriate Land authorities is required; such authorisation is granted if the person concerned satisfies the conditions laid down by law (sections 2 to 4 of the Federal Act).
The veterinary surgeons practising in  constitute the Hamburg Veterinary Surgeons’ Council, which is a public-law association (sections 1 and 2 of the 1964 Act). Its functions include defending the professional interests of the veterinary surgeons, ensuring that the latter meet their professional obligations and assisting the public health services (öffentlicher Gesundheitsdienst) in the performance of their duties (section 3 of the 1964 Act).
The Council’s organs are the governing board (Vorstand) and the general assembly; the latter adopts the Charter and the Rules of Professional Conduct, which are submitted to the Government of the Land for approval (sections 5 and 8 of the 1964 Act).
The Council is under the supervision of the State, which supervision extends to observance of the laws and the Charter (section 18 of the 1964 Act).
The Rules of Professional Conduct of the Hamburg Council require each veterinary surgeon to practise in such a way that the profession inspires respect and confidence; the making of pejorative statements about the person, knowledge or skills of another veterinary surgeon is not allowed (Rule 1 (1) and (2)).
The Rules contain a number of provisions forbidding veterinary surgeons from advertising their own practices. Under Rule 5, veterinary surgeons may only intervene if asked to do so; offering or providing their services without being requested is at variance with the rules of the profession. Rule 7 deals more specifically with publicity and lays down conditions to be observed (see paragraph 16 above). In addition there are Rules 8 and 9, which concern advertisements in the press and name-plates respectively.
Each veterinary surgeon is required to intervene in the event of an emergency (Rule 1 (3)); he must (soll) participate in providing a service at weekends and on holidays and hold himself in readiness to replace any other colleague (Rule 14).
The question of a night service for veterinary surgeons, a matter not dealt with in the law or the Rules of Professional Conduct, has been the subject of debate within the profession (see paragraph 12 above). The Council opted on 11 December 1978 for a voluntary solution whereby veterinary surgeons indicate on a list the times when they may be contacted and the Council communicates to the public, by means of an automatic reply service, the names of those veterinary surgeons who are available even outside normal consultation hours.
According to the Government, it was apparently quite a long time before a relatively sizeable number of veterinary surgeons agreed to participate in this scheme. In 1979, the Council was said to have felt the need to launch an appeal for volunteers for the weekend and emergency service.
Yet again, in 1981, the director of a veterinary clinic publicly criticised the working of the emergency service in  and stated that he had been unsuccessfully campaigning for two years for a duty rota for all veterinary surgeons (see Die Zeit of 11 December 1981).
However, according to the applicant, there has existed since 1982 a system along the lines he had proposed. The Government did not contest this assertion.
An establishment for the treatment of sick animals may be called a "veterinary clinic" if it has the requisite premises and equipment and if the Council has given its approval (Rule 19). The detailed rules are set out in Regulations promulgated by the Council (see paragraph 12 above), the most recent version of which dates from December 1982. The 1982 Regulations lay down that henceforth clinics must provide a round-the-clock service for emergencies unless the Council has made other arrangements guaranteeing adequate assistance.
The 1909 Act applies to any person seeking to derive income from a regular economic activity; it thus covers industrial, commercial and craft activities, services and the liberal professions. It is designed to protect competitors and consumers, and applies independently of the texts, if any, governing the conduct of members of the liberal profession in matters of publicity and advertising.
The courts with jurisdiction to deal with infringements of the 1909 Act - principally the civil courts (section 13 of the Act) - are not bound by any findings made by such professional tribunals as may have considered the same facts in the light of the professional rules governing publicity. However, it has been consistently held by the Federal Court of Justice that breach of these professional rules will, in the normal course of things, also entail infringement of section 1 of the 1909 Act (see paragraph 16 above). The court having to decide the case on the basis of the 1909 Act must nonetheless inquire in each case whether the requirements of section 1 are satisfied.
By virtue of section 13, an action for contravention of, for example, section 1 may be brought by any competitor, by trade and professional associations (gewerbliche und Berufsverbände) and, since 1965, by consumer associations.
In his application of 13 July 1979 to the Commission (no. 8734/79), Dr. Barthold complained of the injunctions against him issued by the German courts. He regarded these injunctions as "indirect sanctions" which had wrongfully interfered with his freedom of expression and freedom of thought as secured by Articles 10 and 9 (art. 10, art. 9) of the Convention, and had violated Articles 6 and 7 (art. 6, art. 7). He further maintained that compulsory membership of the Veterinary Surgeons’ Council contravened Article 11 (art. 11).
On 12 March 1981, the Commission declared the application inadmissible as regards the complaints under Articles 6 and 7 (art. 6, art. 7) (manifestly ill-founded) and Article 11 (art. 11) (incompatibility ratione materiae with the provisions of the Convention). On 13 October 1981, after observing that Dr. Barthold seemed no longer to be pursuing his complaint of interference with his freedom of thought, it admitted the remainder of the application.
In its report of 13 July 1983 (Article 31) (art. 31), it expressed the unanimous opinion that there had been a violation of Article 10 (art. 10). The full text of the Commission’s opinion is reproduced as an annex to the present judgment.
At the hearings on 23 October 1984, the Government confirmed the final submissions set out in their memorial and requested the Court "to find that there was no violation of the rights of the applicant".
The Delegate of the Commission invited the Court "to follow the opinion of the Commission".