The case originated in an application (no. 74438/14) against the Republic of Armenia lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by an Armenian national, Mr Gurgen Nikolyan (“the applicant”), on 13 November 2014.
The applicant was represented by Ms Haykuhi Harutyunyan and Ms A. Melkonyan, lawyers practising in Yerevan, and Ms Hasmik Harutyunyan, a non-practising lawyer. The Armenian Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Mr G. Kostanyan, and subsequently by Mr Y. Kirakosyan, Representative of the Republic of Armenia to the European Court of Human Rights.
The applicant alleged, in particular, that (1) he had been denied access to court in the determination of his divorce and eviction claim, and for restoration of his legal capacity, (2) the proceedings concerning deprivation of his legal capacity had not been fair and (3) his deprivation of legal capacity breached his right to private life.
On 17 November 2016 the complaints concerning the denial of access to court, the alleged lack of adversarial procedure and the applicant’s deprivation of legal capacity were communicated to the Government and the remainder of the application was declared inadmissible pursuant to Rule 54 § 3 of the Rules of Court.
The applicant was born in 1939 and lives in Yerevan.
The applicant lived in a flat with his wife of 15 years and their son and the latter’s wife and child.
On 25 April 2012 the applicant instituted proceedings at the Shengavit District Court of Yerevan (“the District Court”) seeking to divorce his wife and evict her from his flat. The applicant submitted that their co-habitation had become unbearable, as in the past 12 years there had been conflicts in their relationship, as a result of which they had already de facto separated. The applicant submitted that the flat in question was not their common property and by law he was its sole owner.
On 4 July 2012 the applicant’s wife instituted “special” court proceedings (հատուկ վարույթ) under Article 168 of the Code of Civil Procedure (CCP), seeking to declare the applicant incapable. She submitted that the applicant had become unrecognisable: he constantly initiated arguments, made accusations and threatened her, other family members and in general people around him. He had recently threatened to take revenge and to throw all of them out onto the street. He had first applied to the police to have her and others’ registrations at that address cancelled and then lodged a claim to divorce and evict her which, she claimed, were signs of a mental disorder. The applicant’s wife explained that she had no choice but to apply to a court because the applicant’s behaviour posed a threat to the entire family, as his next step would be to evict the other family members and it was necessary to prevent that. Attached to her application was a statement signed by four of their neighbours, dated 28 June 2012, according to which the applicant had begun to behave strangely over the last few years, constantly seeking conflict with people around him and addressing absurd accusations at his wife and other family members. The neighbours added that they believed that the applicant was suffering from a mental disorder.
On the same date the District Court ordered the applicant’s examination by a panel of psychiatric experts, asking them to determine whether the applicant was able to understand the meaning of his actions and to control them. The District Court added that such examination was necessary because the evidence submitted by the applicant’s wife might be insufficient to grant her application.
On 25 September 2012 the panel of psychiatric experts issued their opinion after having examined the applicant and other evidence. The opinion, a two-page document, first summarised the statements made by his wife, neighbours and a local police officer, according to which in recent years the applicant had become suspicious, intolerant and argumentative, constantly seeking conflict with his wife and others around him, addressing absurd accusations at his wife, physically abusing her and accusing her of infidelity and of swindling him. It then analysed the applicant’s behaviour during an interview conducted with him. Based on the above, the panel concluded that the applicant suffered from “delusional disorder”, a mental illness whose symptoms had reached a degree which deprived the applicant of the ability to understand the meaning of his actions and to control them.
On 14 November 2012 the applicant’s son also instituted “special” court proceedings under Article 168 of the CCP, seeking to declare the applicant incapable on the ground that he was suffering from a mental disorder and required special care.
On 22 November 2012 the District Court decided to stay the divorce and eviction proceedings until final resolution of the two applications that had been initiated in respect of the applicant after he had filed his divorce and eviction claim.
On 13 December 2012 the District Court examined the application lodged by the applicant’s wife in the applicant’s presence and decided to reject it, noting the conflict of interest between the applicant and his wife and finding that the expert opinion of 25 September 2012 was necessary, but insufficient evidence for depriving the applicant of his legal capacity. The District Court concluded that the applicant’s wife’s application did not pursue a legitimate aim; hence depriving the applicant of his legal capacity in such circumstances would entail serious and irreversible consequences for him, making him a potential victim of a breach of the Convention.
On 9 January 2013 the applicant’s wife lodged an appeal against that judgment.
On 8 February 2013 the District Court, in a different composition, granted the application lodged by the applicant’s son and declared the applicant incapable. The District Court relied on the psychiatric expert opinion of 25 September 2012 and concluded that the applicant was unable to understand the meaning of his actions and to control them. The applicant was not notified of the application lodged by his son or of the hearing at the District Court.
No appeal was lodged against that judgment so it became final on 11 March 2013.
On 20 March 2013 the local body of guardianship and trusteeship appointed the applicant’s son as his guardian on the basis of the judgment of 8 February 2013.
On 28 March 2013 the Civil Court of Appeal reversed the judgment of 13 December 2012 and remitted the case upon the applicant’s wife’s appeal. The Civil Court of Appeal noted that at the time when the District Court examined the applicant’s wife’s application the final judgment of 8 February 2013 declaring the applicant incapable had not existed. Therefore she had not been able to present that judgment, which was key evidence for the resolution of the case, to the District Court for reasons beyond her control. The Civil Court of Appeal concluded that this reason alone was sufficient to reverse the judgment of 13 December 2012.
On 31 May 2013 the applicant, having learned about the judgment of 8 February 2013, lodged an appeal against it on the ground that the District Court had declared him incapable without notifying him of the hearing.
On 11 July 2013 the Civil Court of Appeal reversed the judgment of 8 February 2013 and ordered a new examination on the ground that the applicant had not been notified of the hearing of the case concerning his legal capacity.
On 30 August 2013 the District Court decided to involve the applicant as a third party to the proceedings.
On 3 October 2013 the District Court held a preparatory hearing in the applicant’s presence and decided to join the applications lodged by the applicant’s wife and son and examine them together.
On 31 October 2013 the District Court held another preparatory hearing. According to the record of the hearing, a representative of the local body of guardianship and trusteeship, R.S., represented the applicant, who was absent from the hearing. It is not clear from the record whether any issues were discussed at this hearing
On 18 November 2013 the District Court held a trial hearing with the participation of the applicant, his wife and R.S. After R.S. endorsed the applications lodged by the applicant’s wife and son relying on the psychiatric expert opinion of 25 September 2012, the presiding judge invited the applicant to state his position in that respect. The applicant denied that he was suffering from a serious mental disorder and argued that bribery was involved in the process of his psychiatric examination. He also stated that his relationship with his wife had been unbearable, since she had swindled him and frequently ridiculed him in front of others and that, as a result, he wanted to divorce her. The applicant also urged the judge to read “Article 48 of the European law” and “Article 32 of the Armenian law”. The presiding judge asked the applicant’s wife to explain the reasons why she sought to deprive the applicant of his legal capacity. The applicant’s wife firstly confirmed that they had had a conflictual relationship over the past 12 years and one of the reasons for this was that the applicant was overly jealous and suspicious. In addition, she stated that the applicant had threatened to stab himself with a knife. She explained that when the applicant filed the divorce and eviction claim, she had felt compelled to lodge an application seeking to declare him incapable.
On 29 November 2013, in the applicant’s presence, the District Court granted the joint application of his wife and son and declared the applicant incapable on the basis of Article 31 of the Civil Code (CC). Relying on the psychiatric expert opinion of 25 September 2012, the District Court held that, as a result of his mental disorder, the applicant was unable to understand the meaning of his actions and to control them.
The applicant lodged an appeal in which he argued that it had not been established that he was unable to understand the meaning of his actions. The District Court’s interpretation and application of Article 31 of the CC unduly restricted the scope of his civil rights. It was questionable whether the stated illness, namely “delusional disorder”, in fact deprived him of the ability to understand the meaning of his actions, as the contested judgment did not state any example or situation in which his alleged incapability was displayed. In addition, the District Court had failed to order a new medical assessment of his mental health and relied on the outdated opinion of 25 September 2012. Relying on Article 8 of the Convention and the Court’s judgment in the case of Shtukaturov v. Russia (no. 44009/05, ECHR 2008), the applicant argued that the failure of the domestic courts to scrutinise closely the degree of his illness was a breach of his right to private life. The applicant also submitted that the motivation of the applicant’s wife to deprive him of legal capacity was to deprive him of his flat. Finally, the applicant also expressed discontent with regard to his procedural status of a “third party”, as he could not be a mere “third party” in a case concerning deprivation of his legal capacity.
On 7 March 2014 the Civil Court of Appeal rejected the applicant’s appeal. It found that the psychiatric expert opinion of 25 September 2012 was sufficient evidence to declare the applicant incapable. The Court of Appeal stated that there was no evidence to rebut the findings made in that expert opinion or to suggest that the applicant had recovered.
The applicant lodged an appeal on points of law.
On 10 April 2014 the applicant wrote to the local body of guardianship and trusteeship asking that his opinion be taken into account when appointing his guardian.
On 30 April 2014 the Court of Cassation declared the applicant’s appeal on points of law inadmissible for lack of merit.
On 19 June 2014 the applicant’s son filed a request with the District Court seeking to withdraw the applicant’s divorce and eviction claim on the grounds that the applicant had been declared incapable. He also informed the District Court that he had been appointed as the applicant’s guardian by a decision of the local body of guardianship and trusteeship of 20 March 2013.
On 14 August 2014 the District Court decided to resume the divorce and eviction proceedings.
On 16 September 2014 the body of guardianship and trusteeship endorsed its decision of 20 March 2013 appointing the applicant’s son as his guardian, relying this time on the judgment of 29 November 2013.
On 1 October 2014 the District Court granted the request of the applicant’s son and terminated the divorce and eviction proceedings on the ground that the domestic law authorised a guardian to withdraw the claim of a person declared incapable, on the latter’s behalf. It also stated that the applicant’s son was appointed as guardian with the applicant’s consent and at his wish.
On 19 February 2015 the applicant lodged an application with the Administrative Court seeking to quash the decision of the body of guardianship and trusteeship of 20 March 2013 and to appoint a new guardian.
On 25 February 2015 the Administrative Court declared the applicant’s application inadmissible on the ground that the applicant had been declared incapable, as a result of which he lacked standing to lodge such a claim.
The applicant appealed against that decision.
On 16 April 2015 the Administrative Court of Appeal dismissed the applicant’s appeal.
The applicant lodged an appeal on points of law.
On 28 September 2016 the Court of Cassation granted the applicant’s appeal on points of law and quashed the decision of the Administrative Court of Appeal. The Court of Cassation reasoned its decision to admit the applicant’s appeal for examination on the ground that it was necessary to clarify whether or not a person declared incapable had the right to contest the decision appointing his guardian. As regards the merits, the Court of Cassation took note of the applicant’s submissions on conflict of interest and regular disputes between him and his son. It found that, notwithstanding the duty of the body of guardianship and trusteeship under Article 37 § 3 of the CC to hear the opinion of the applicant and consider his wish when appointing his guardian, it had apparently failed to do so, even though the applicant had requested a hearing. It concluded that, in such circumstances, requiring the applicant to seek judicial protection as regards the appointment of his guardian exclusively through his guardian was, at least, ineffective in practice. As a person affected by the decision on the appointment of his guardian, the applicant should have enjoyed the right to contest such decision before a court since the impossibility to do so would violate the applicant’s right of access to court.
On 14 November 2016 the Administrative Court of Appeal quashed the decision of the Administrative Court of 25 February 2015 and remitted the case for new examination.
At the time of final exchange of observations between the parties, the proceedings in question were still pending before the Administrative Court and their outcome is unknown.
On 23 May 2014 the applicant filed a letter with the Minister of Health, seeking a new psychiatric examination to determine whether or not he was able to understand the meaning of his actions and control them, because almost two years had passed since the only psychiatric expert opinion of 25 September 2012.
On 2 June 2014 the Ministry of Health replied that it had no authority to order such an examination.
On 22 August 2014 the applicant applied to a psychiatric hospital seeking a psychiatric expert examination. The hospital apparently never responded to this request.
On the same date the applicant applied to the District Court, stating that his state of health required a review because almost two years had passed since the psychiatric expert opinion of 25 September 2012 which had been the sole ground for declaring him incapable, and requesting the court to assign a new psychiatric expert examination to determine whether or not his mental health allowed him to understand the meaning of his actions and to control them.
On 28 August 2014 the District Court replied to the applicant that, under Article 173 § 1 of the CCP, it was competent to declare a person who has recovered legally capable on the basis of a relevant psychiatric expert opinion, upon an application lodged by the guardian, a family member or the administration of a psychiatric institution. It had no authority to request a new psychiatric expert examination in view of the final judgment of 29 November 2013.
On 7 April 2015 the Constitutional Court, upon an application lodged by the Ombudsman, declared Article 173 § 1 of the CCP unconstitutional, in so far as it deprived persons seeking to restore their legal capacity of the possibility to avail themselves personally of the right to be heard by a court and to participate in the proceedings.
On 11 May 2015 the applicant, represented by lawyers, instituted proceedings in the District Court seeking to be declared legally capable. The District Court admitted the applicant’s application and granted him procedural status as a third party.
On 29 June 2015 the District Court ordered the applicant’s examination by a psychiatric expert panel in order to determine whether he was able to understand the meaning of his actions or to control them.
On 29 October 2015 the panel concluded that the applicant could be suffering from “delusional disorder”, “jealousy delirium” and “lightly expressed age-related personality change”. It stated that an inpatient examination was necessary, as it was unable to make a precise diagnosis of the applicant’s condition and answer the District Court’s questions.
The applicant’s lawyer lodged a request with the District Court seeking an outpatient psychiatric examination, arguing that an inpatient examination would adversely affect the applicant’s mental and physical health.
On 1 August 2016 the District Court ordered the applicant’s outpatient psychiatric examination and asked the examination panel to answer the following questions:
On 6 December 2016 the psychiatric expert panel, having examined the applicant, delivered its report as follows:
“[the applicant] suffers from a mental disorder, i.e. “intellectual retardation of mixed origin”, which is expressed in grave disturbance of memory and intellect, disturbances of the functions of thought, analysis, cognition, speech, perception and production. The abovementioned [conditions] reached a degree which deprived [the applicant] of the ability to understand the meaning of his actions or to control them. Hence, under the current conditions, it is advised to deprive [the applicant] of his legal capacity”.
At the time of exchange of observations between the parties, the proceedings were still pending before the domestic courts. The outcome of those proceedings is unknown.
Article 31 provides that a person who, as a result of a mental disorder, is unable to understand the meaning of his or her actions or to control them may be declared incapable by a court, in accordance with the procedure prescribed by the CCP. Transactions on behalf of a person declared incapable are handled by his or her guardian. A court restores a person’s legal capacity, if the grounds on the basis of which he was declared incapable cease to exist. Guardianship is terminated on the basis of such judgment.
Article 32 provides that legal capacity of a person may be restricted by a court, in accordance with the procedure prescribed by the CCP, if he or she puts his family into a difficult financial situation as a result of alcohol or drug abuse or gambling. Trusteeship is assigned in respect of such persons.
Article 33 §§ 1 and 2 provides that guardianship and trusteeship are designated for the purpose of protecting the rights and interests of incapable persons or those whose legal capacity has been restricted. Guardians and trustees defend the rights and interests of their wards in their relations with everyone, including before the courts, without a special authorisation.
Article 37 §§ 1 and 3 provides that a guardian is appointed by the local body of guardianship and trusteeship. The appointment of a guardian may be contested before a court by persons concerned. When appointing a guardian, the nature of the relationship between the potential guardian and the ward and, if possible, the wishes of the ward are taken into account, among other things.
Section 2 of Part 3 of the Code, entitled “Special proceedings”, includes Chapter 29 (Articles 168-173) which regulates the procedure for declaring a person incapable.
Article 168 § 1 provides that an application for a person to be declared incapable may be lodged by his or her family members, a body of guardianship and trusteeship or the administration of a psychiatric institution.
Article 169 § 1 provides that an application for a person to be declared incapable must indicate the circumstances demonstrating a person’s mental disorder and as a result of which he or she is unable to understand the meaning of his or her actions or to control them.
Article 170 provides that, if there is a reasonable suspicion that a person suffers from a mental disorder, the judge orders a psychiatric expert examination to determine the state of mental health of the person in question.
Article 171 § 1 provides that an application for a person to be declared incapable must be examined in the presence of a representative of a body of guardianship and trusteeship. The person concerned may be invited to the hearing, if his state of health permits.
Article 172 § 1 provides that the body of guardianship and trusteeship appoints a guardian on the basis of a judgment declaring a person incapable.
Article 173 § 1 provides that, in cases prescribed by the CC, the court declares a person who has recovered capable, on the basis of a relevant psychiatric expert opinion, upon an application lodged by the guardian, a family member or the administration of a psychiatric institution.
Article 27 provides that persons participating in the proceedings include (1) the parties; (2) third parties; and (3) applicants in cases envisaged by Part 3 of the Code.
Article 35 § 2 provides that third parties who have no claims of their own in respect of the dispute enjoy the same rights as the parties, except the right to change the grounds or subject of a claim, to increase or decrease the amount of a claim, to withdraw a claim, to accept a claim or enter into a friendly settlement, and to demand compulsory enforcement of a judicial decision.
Article 43 § 1 provides that the rights and legitimate interests of persons declared incapable are defended before the courts by their parents (or foster parents), guardians or trustees.
Article 105 provides that the court must suspend the proceedings if, inter alia, it is impossible to examine the case until final resolution of another constitutional, civil, criminal or administrative case, or if the individual participating in the case has been declared incapable.
On 23 February 1999 the Committee of Ministers of the Council of Europe adopted Recommendation No. R (99) 4 on “Principles concerning the legal protection of incapable adults”. For the relevant parts of the Recommendation see Stanev v. Bulgaria ([GC], no. 36760/06, § 73, ECHR 2012). Other relevant parts not cited in that judgment read as follows:
“1.  In establishing or implementing a measure of protection for an incapable adult the past and present wishes and feelings of the adult should be ascertained so far as possible, and should be taken into account and given due respect.
This principle implies, in particular, that the wishes of the adult as to the choice of any person to represent or assist him or her should be taken into account and, as far as possible, given due respect.”
“1.  There should be adequate procedures for the investigation and assessment of the adult’s personal faculties.
No measure of protection which restricts the legal capacity of an incapable adult should be taken unless [...] an up-to-date report from at least one suitably qualified expert has been submitted.”
“There should be adequate control of the operation of measures of protection and of the acts and decisions of representatives.”
On the same date the Committee of Ministers of the Council of Europe adopted the Explanatory Memorandum to Recommendation No. R (99) 4. Paragraph 47 provides the following explanation of Principle 8:
“This principle implies among other things that the choice of any person to represent or assist an incapable adult should be governed by the suitability of that person to safeguard and promote the adult’s interests and welfare. In some family situations there are quite acute conflicts of interest and, while the invaluable and irreplaceable role of family members must be fully recognised and valued, the law must also be aware of the dangers which exist in certain situations of family conflict”.
In December 2006 the United Nations Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities (hereafter “the CRPD”) was adopted. It entered into force internationally in May 2008. By the end of September 2016, 44 out of the 47 Council of Europe member States had ratified the Convention. Armenia ratified the Convention on 22 September 2010. Article 12 of the CRPD, entitled “Equal recognition before the law”, provides as follows:
“1.  States Parties reaffirm that persons with disabilities have the right to recognition everywhere as persons before the law.
States Parties shall recognise that persons with disabilities enjoy legal capacity on an equal basis with others in all aspects of life.
States Parties shall take appropriate measures to provide access by persons with disabilities to the support they may require in exercising their legal capacity.
States Parties shall ensure that all measures that relate to the exercise of legal capacity provide for appropriate and effective safeguards to prevent abuse in accordance with international human rights law. Such safeguards shall ensure that measures relating to the exercise of legal capacity respect the rights, will and preferences of the person, are free of conflict of interest and undue influence, are proportional and tailored to the person’s circumstances, apply for the shortest time possible and are subject to regular review by a competent, independent and impartial authority or judicial body. The safeguards shall be proportional to the degree to which such measures affect the person’s rights and interests.
Subject to the provisions of this article, States Parties shall take all appropriate and effective measures to ensure the equal right of persons with disabilities to own or inherit property, to control their own financial affairs and to have equal access to bank loans, mortgages and other forms of financial credit, and shall ensure that persons with disabilities are not arbitrarily deprived of their property.”