The case originated in an application (no. 6899/12) against the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Macedonian national, Mr Jordan Mitrinovski (“the applicant”), on 27 January 2012.
The applicant was represented by Mr J. Mitrinovski, a lawyer practising in Skopje. The Macedonian Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Mr K. Bogdanov.
Mirjana Lazarova Trajkovska, the judge elected in respect of the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, was unable to sit in the case (Rule 28). On 26 August 2014 the President of the Chamber decided to appoint Ksenija Turković to sit as an ad hoc judge (Rule 29).
The applicant alleged inter alia that the State Judicial Council that had dismissed him from the office of judge was not an “independent and impartial tribunal” within the meaning of Article 6 § 1 of the Convention.
On 18 February 2013 this complaint was communicated to the Government. It was also decided to apply Rule 41 of the Rules of Court and grant priority treatment to the application.
The applicant was born in 1950 and lives in Skopje.
On 6 December 2010 a three-judge panel of the Skopje Court of Appeal, presided over by the applicant (including Judges I.L. and M.S.), decided, in second instance, to grant an appeal of a detainee. The panel accepted a proposed bail and replaced an order for detention on remand with an order for house arrest (Ксж.бр. 537/2010). On 9 December 2010 the State Public Prosecutor challenged this decision by means of a request for the protection of legality (барање за заштита на законитоста). He sought that the Supreme Court declared that decision unlawful and that it be remitted for fresh consideration.
On 10 December 2010 a five-judge panel of the Supreme Court, presided over by Judge J.V., the President of the Supreme Court at the time, held a session at which the public prosecutor’s request was examined. The Supreme Court accepted the prosecutor’s amended request (преиначено) and stated inter alia that:
“The Supreme Court finds that Skopje Court of Appeal, which decided the appeal ... against the decision ... in which the Skopje Court of First Instance had dismissed a request for termination of pre-trial detention (предлог за укинување на мерката притвор) as unsubstantiated, had no statutory ground to decide the complaints on the merits, but, on the contrary, it was bound by law to establish that the appeal ... was inadmissible ...”
On 10 December 2010 the criminal division of the Supreme Court composed of six judges of that court, including Judge J.V. (see section 39(1) of the Rules of the Supreme Court, paragraph 22 below), held a session at which they discussed the case Ксж.бр. 537/2010. Following an examination of the record of the deliberations of the Skopje Court of Appeal regarding the decision of 6 December 2010 (see paragraph 7 above), the criminal division of the Supreme Court concluded that two judges had disclosed professional misconduct. The relevant part of the record of that session reads as follows:
“... the criminal division of the Supreme Court unanimously found (едногласно се донесе заклучок) that there had been professional misconduct by two judges of the Skopje Court of Appeal who had adjudicated in the case Ксж.бр. 537/2010.
The President of the Supreme Court, J.V., then closed the session of the criminal division.”
In submissions of the same date, Judge J.V., as an ex officio member of the State Judicial Council (“the SJC”, see Amendment XXVIII to the Constitution, paragraph 19 below), requested that the SJC establish professional misconduct in respect of the applicant and Judge I.L. This request was submitted pursuant to sections 78 and 79 of the State Judicial Act 2010 (“the Act”, see paragraph 20 below) according to which a member of the SJC or the president of the higher court can seek that professional misconduct proceedings were launched regarding a judge. As stated in the request, there were reasonable grounds to believe that the applicant and Judge I.L. had exercised the office of judge in an unprofessional and unconscientious manner given that they had voted in favour of the decision of 6 December 2010 in the criminal case Ксж.бр. 537/2010, which had been in violation of the Criminal Proceedings Act. In support, he submitted copies of the decisions of 6 and 10 December 2010 (see paragraphs 7 and 8 above).
On 23 December 2010 the plenary of the SJC, including Judge J.V., discussed Judge J.V.’s request for determination of professional misconduct on the part of the applicant and accepted it as timely, complete and admissible. It also set up a Commission for determination of professional misconduct by the applicant (“the Commission”), composed of five of its members, including the President of the SJC (see section 80 of the Act, paragraph 20 below). The composition of the Commission did not include Judge J.V.
On 29 December 2010 the Commission communicated Judge J.V.’s request and the supporting evidence to the applicant. On 18 January 2011 the applicant responded in writing and provided evidence in support (see section 81 of the Act, paragraph 20 below). Judge I.L. resigned in the meantime. After the Commission had obtained the material in the case Ксж.бр. 537/2010, on 14 January 2011 it submitted a report to the (plenary of the) SJC as to whether Judge J.V.’s request was justified.
On 23 February 2010, the plenary of the SJC, including Judge J.V., initiated professional misconduct proceedings against the applicant and temporarily suspended him from the office of judge. In the decision, the SJC relied on sections 84 and 86 of the Act (see paragraph 20 below). The relevant parts of this decision read as follows:
“The SJC, on the basis of (Judge J.V.’s) request ... set up (the Commission) ... After the Commission had taken actions pursuant to sections 81 and 82 of (the Act), it submitted, under section 83 of (the Act), to the SJC a report as to whether the request was justified.
The SJC ... discussed the request and the Commission’s proposal and decided to initiate professional misconduct proceedings ...”
On 19 April 2011 the Commission held, pursuant to section 87 of the Act (see paragraph 20 below), a hearing. As noted in the record of the hearing, it was attended by the applicant and his legal representative, as well as by Judge J.V. as complainant. Judge J.V.stated inter alia that:
“... I submitted the request (for determination of unprofessional and unconscientious exercise of the office of judge regarding the applicant) for the following reasons: (the applicant), as the chairman of the panel and a judge rapporteur (in the case Ксж.бр. 537/2010) and judge I.L., as a member of that panel, contrary to (the Criminal Proceedings Act) ... had unlawfully decided on the merits ... they had no statutory ground to decide on the merits of the complaints raised in the appeal, but they were bound by law to reject the appeal as inadmissible. For these reasons, I consider that in this case ... there are grounds [to be established that there was] unprofessional and unconscientious exercise of the office of judge ...
I must underline that I submitted this request to the SJC in view of the conclusion of the criminal division of the Supreme Court of 10 December 2010 [see paragraph 9 above] ...”
After the applicant had presented his arguments verbally, the President of the Commission put several questions to him. The applicant’s lawyer and judge J.V. did not put any questions notwithstanding that they were provided with such an opportunity. Then, the applicant and judge J.V. made concluding remarks. The record of the hearing indicated that under section 92 of the Act (see paragraph 20 below), the Commission would draw up a report, which would be communicated to the SJC for consideration. The record of the hearing was signed by the applicant, judge J.V., as the complainant, and the members of the Commission (see section 90 of the Act, paragraph 20 below). As evident from the available material, the Commission submitted such a report in which it proposed that the SJC dismiss the applicant for professional misconduct.
On 18 May 2011 the plenary of the SJC, which included judge J.V., dismissed the applicant from the office of judge for professional misconduct. The relevant parts of the decision read as follows:
“The SJC finds that Skopje Court of Appeal had no statutory ground to examine and decide on the merits of the complaints raised in the appeal [in the criminal case Ксж.бр. 537/2010], but it was bound by law to establish that the accused’s appeal submitted by his lawyer had been inadmissible. Accordingly, it decided in violation to (the Criminal Proceedings Act).
...
Such a decision is unlawful and contrary to [relevant provisions of the Criminal Proceedings Act] ...
...
When establishing unprofessional and unconscientious exercise of the office of judge [by the applicant], the SJC relied, as a legal ground, on the judgment of the Supreme Court [see paragraph 8 above] and the conclusion of the criminal division of the Supreme Court of 10 December 2010 [see paragraph 9 above]. The (criminal) division explicitly established that (the applicant), as chairman of the panel and a judge rapporteur, ... had been unprofessional and decided contrary to [the relevant provisions of the Criminal Proceedings Act] ...”
The applicant appealed against that decision before the second-instance body, namely an Appeal Panel formed within the Supreme Court on an ad hoc basis in each case separately and composed, as specified in section 96 of the Act (see paragraph 20 below), of nine judges, of whom three were to be Supreme Court judges, four Appeal Court judges and two judges of the court of the applicant. He also sought withdrawal of judge J.V. and all the Supreme Court judges. In support he stated that there was a conflict of interest, as judge J.V. had sought his dismissal and had later voted for it as an ex officio member of the SJC. The position he held was such that he could influence other judges of that court.
On 13 September 2011 the Appeal Panel dismissed the appeal and confirmed the SJC’s decision dismissing him from the office of judge. It also refused his request for the withdrawal of judges. It found that it was the plenary of the Supreme Court, and not the Appeal Panel, which had competence to decide on the applicant’s request for the withdrawal of the President of the Supreme Court. Relying on the Civil Proceedings Act it further rejected as inadmissible the applicant’s request for the withdrawal of all the judges of a court.
In December 2005 Parliament adopted several Amendments to the Constitution. The relevant provisions read as follows:
“1.  ... A judge can be dismissed from office:
- for serious violation of disciplinary rules which makes him or her unsuitable to exercise the office of judge and - for unprofessional and unconscientious exercise of the office of judge under conditions stipulated by law.”
“... The Judicial Council is composed of fifteen members. The President of the Supreme Court of the Republic of Macedonia and the Minister of Justice are ex officio members of the Judicial Council. Eight members of the Council are elected by judges from among their peers ... Five members ... are elected by Parliament.”
Relevant provisions of the State Judicial Act 2010 (“the Act”) read as follows:
“On the basis of a report [of the Commission] and the deliberations, the SJC can ...
- stay the disciplinary proceedings;
- issue a disciplinary penalty adequate to the violation and
- dismiss the judge for a gross violation of disciplinary rules (потешка дисциплинска повреда).”
“The SJC can issue the following disciplinary penalties if it establishes that a judge is responsible for a disciplinary offense:
- a written reprimand,
- a public reprimand and
- a salary reduction in the range of 15% to 30% ...”
“A judge can be dismissed for unprofessional and unconscientious exercise of the office of judge under conditions specified by law.”
“Professional misconduct proceedings in respect of a judge may be instituted by a member of the SJC, the president of the court [of a judge whose dismissal is being sought], the president of the higher court or plenary of the Supreme Court of the Republic of Macedonia (“the complainant”) ...
The proceedings are urgent and confidential. The public are excluded and the reputation and dignity of the judge concerned are respected ...
At the request of a judge, the SJC may decide that the proceedings are to be public ...”
“A request for professional misconduct proceedings specified in section 78(1) of this Act is submitted to the SJC and it contains, inter alia, [personal information] about the judge, address and place of residence ... description of the alleged violation ... and an outline of the evidence to be admitted at a hearing.
The request should be accompanied by supporting evidence.”
“The SJC decides whether a request for professional misconduct proceedings is timely, complete and admissible.
...
If the SJC finds the request admissible, it sets up from among its members a Commission for determination of professional misconduct (Комисија за утврдување нестручно и несовесно вршење на судиската функција) composed of a chairman and four members ...”
“The Commission communicates the request and supporting evidence to the judge concerned.
The judge may respond in writing or give a verbal statement within 8 days after the request is served on him or her.
The judge against whom the request is submitted has the right to a legal representative whom he or she invites to the hearing.
Together with the observations in reply to the request, the judge concerned submits all evidence in support of his or her response ...”
“The Commission seeks information and gathers evidence relevant for [the case].”
“On the basis of information and evidence gathered, the Commission submits a report to the SJC stating whether the request is justified.”
“The SJC examines the request and the Commission’s proposal and decides to institute or stay professional misconduct proceedings.
The SJC takes (this) decision by a majority of all its members ...”
“The decision specified in section 84 of this Act is served on the complainant (подносител на барањето), the judge [whose dismissal is sought], and the president of that judge’s court and the case file is forwarded to the Commission.”
“When the SJC initiates professional misconduct proceedings, it may temporary suspend from work the judge concerned.”
“The Commission must schedule a hearing within fifteen days of the institution of professional misconduct proceedings.
All members of the Commission attend the hearing.
The chairman of the Commission presides over the hearing.”
“The complainant and the judge concerned are summoned to a hearing. They are provided with evidence gathered by the Commission.
If they have been duly summoned and fail to attend without providing any justification, the hearing is held in their absence.”
“All evidence presented by the complainant, the judge concerned and evidence obtained by the Commission is heard at the hearing.
The judge concerned can argue in relation to all evidence adduced at the hearing.”
“The record of the hearing is signed by the complainant, the judge concerned or his or her representative, the (members of the) Commission and the minutes holder ...”
“The Commission draws up a report for the SJC within fifteen days of the hearing with a proposal for (one of the) following decisions:
-  that the proceedings are stayed if there are no grounds for professional misconduct by a judge or
-  that the judge must be dismissed due to professional misconduct.”
“On the basis of the (Commission’s) report and after the hearing, the SJC may ...
-  stay the proceedings if there are no grounds for professional misconduct or
-  dismiss the judge due to professional misconduct.”
“The SJC takes the decision specified in section 94 of this Act by a two-thirds majority of all its members.
...
A transcript of the decision is served on the judge, his or her representative, the complainant and the president of the court of the judge concerned or to the president of the immediate higher court.”
“The judge concerned can challenge the SJC’s dismissal decision before a second-instance panel set up within the Supreme Court (“the Appeal Panel”) ...
The Appeal Panel is composed of nine members, of whom three Supreme Court judges, four Appeal Court judges and two judges of the court of the judge against whom proceedings have been conducted.
The President of the Supreme Court may not be a member of the Appeal Panel.
The Appeal Panel may uphold or quash the SJC’s dismissal decision ...”
.  Section 400 of the 2005 Civil Proceedings Act provides for the possibility of reopening proceedings in respect of which the Court has found a violation of the Convention. In such reopened proceedings the domestic courts are required to comply with the provisions of the final judgment of the Court.
.  Relevant provisions of the Rules of the Supreme Court read as follows:
“The following judicial divisions are set up within the Supreme Court:
Criminal division
Civil division
Case-law division”
“The court exercises its work specified by the Constitution and Law on Courts through:
- chambers;
- session of divisions;
- joint session of divisions;
- plenary session.”
“Proceedings and decisions in criminal cases fall within the competence of judges of the criminal division.”
“The division is composed of all judges who deal with cases that fall within the competence of that division, as well as (law clerks) ...”
In February 2015 the National Parliament adopted a new Act on the Council for establishing facts and initiation of proceedings for determination of responsibility of a judge, which provides for the creation of the Council, a new body which role is to establish, in proceedings regulated with this Act, relevant facts and decide whether it will submit an application for professional misconduct proceedings in respect of a judge (sections 2 and 49). It is composed of nine members (retired judges, prosecutors and lawyers, section 6) elected by all judges in the respondent State, on direct and secret ballot (section 16). It can inter alia submit an application to the SJC for initiation of proceedings for determination of responsibility of a judge or president of a court (section 32). The Act will become operational three months after it would enter into force (section 53).
In February 2015 the National Parliament also amended the State Judicial Act. Section 16 replaces section 78(1) of the Act (see paragraph 20 above) and provides that the Council, instead of a member of the SJC, the president of the court [of a judge whose dismissal is being sought], the president of the higher court or plenary of the Supreme Court, may initiate professional misconduct proceedings before the SJC. This Act will become operational three months after it would enter into force (section 31).
.  The relevant provisions of the Opinion read as follows:
“8.  The Council for the Judiciary is intended to safeguard both the independence of the judicial system and the independence of individual judges. The existence of independent and impartial courts is a structural requirement of a state governed by the rule of law.
C. 2. Discipline
The question of a judge’s responsibility was examined by the CCJE in Opinion No.3(2002). The recent experiences of some States show the need to protect judges from the temptation to broaden the scope of their responsibility in purely jurisdictional matters. The role of the Council for the Judiciary is to show that a judge cannot bear the same responsibilities as a member of another profession: he/she performs a public function and cannot refuse to adjudicate on disputes. Furthermore, if the judge is exposed to legal and disciplinary sanctions against his/her decisions, neither judicial independence nor the democratic balance of powers can be maintained. The Council for the Judiciary should, therefore, unequivocally condemn political projects designed to limit the judges’ freedom of decision-making. This does not diminish judges’ duty to respect the law.
A judge who neglects his/her cases through indolence or who is blatantly incompetent when dealing with them should face disciplinary sanctions. Even in such cases, as indicated by CCJE Opinion No.3(2002), it is important that judges enjoy the protection of a disciplinary proceeding guaranteeing the respect of the principle of independence of the judiciary and carried out before a body free from any political influence, on the basis of clearly defined disciplinary faults: a Head of State, Minister of Justice or any other representative of political authorities cannot take part in the disciplinary body.
The Council for the Judiciary is entrusted with ethical issues; it may furthermore address court users’ complaints. In order to avoid conflicts of interest, disciplinary procedures in first instance, when not addressed within the jurisdiction of a disciplinary court, should preferably be dealt with by a disciplinary commission composed of a substantial representation of judges elected by their peers, different from the members of the Council for the Judiciary, with provision of an appeal before a superior court.”
.  The relevant provisions of the Magna Carta of Judges read as follows:
“6.  Disciplinary proceedings shall take place before an independent body with the possibility of recourse before a court.”
“13.  To ensure independence of judges, each State shall create a Council for the Judiciary or another specific body, itself independent from legislative and executive powers, endowed with broad competences for all questions concerning their status as well as the organisation, the functioning and the image of judicial institutions. The Council shall be composed either of judges exclusively or of a substantial majority of judges elected by their peers. The Council for the Judiciary shall be accountable for its activities and decisions.”