The case originated in an application (no. 8806/12) against the French Republic lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a French national, Mr Jean-Michel Aycaguer (“the applicant”), on 20 January 2012.
The applicant was represented by Ms A.-M. Mendiboure, a lawyer practising in Bayonne. The French Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Mr F. Alabrune, Director of Legal Affairs with the Ministry of Foreign Affairs.
The applicant alleged, in particular, that his conviction for having refused to undergo DNA profiling had amounted to an unjustified infringement of his right to respect for his private life within the meaning of Article 8 of the Convention.
On 26 March 2014 the application was communicated to the Government.
The applicant was born in 1959 and lives in Ossès.
On 17 January 2008 he attended a rally organised by a Basque agricultural trade union and by the GFAM (a mutual-benefit land alliance), the “Lurra”, on the occasion of a meeting of the Technical Committee of the Land Use and Rural Settlement Corporation (SAFER) in the Pyrénées-Atlantiques Département. That meeting had been aimed at producing an opinion on the use of the land comprising a farm which Mr F.L. had been operating for several years. The rally was held in a political and trade-union situation where tensions had been heightened by the fact that the majority agricultural union in the Département was backing candidates other than Mr F.L. At the end of the meeting scuffles broke out between the demonstrators and the gendarmerie.
The applicant was placed in police custody and brought before the Bayonne Criminal Court under “immediate summary trial” procedure, and charged with intentional violence not entailing total unfitness for work, against gendarmes whose identity has not been established, and against a person exercising public authority, using or threatening to use a weapon, in this instance an umbrella.
By judgment of 13 March 2008, the applicant was sentenced to two months’ imprisonment, suspended, for having struck gendarmes with an umbrella, which incident had not entailed unfitness for work on the latter’s part. In its judgment, the court noted that the applicant had refused to answer questions during the investigation or to admit to any wrongdoing, and had denied that he had been carrying an umbrella. The judges noted that witnesses had nevertheless stated that he had attempted to cross the barrier by clambering over demonstrators and trying to hit the gendarmes with his umbrella. The applicant pointed out that he had refrained from appealing in order to calm the situation and in the framework of a friendly settlement of the dispute that had been the cause of the rally.
On 24 December 2008, following a request from the Bayonne Public Prosecutor’s Office, the applicant was ordered by the police to give a DNA sample, on the basis of Articles 706-55 and 706-56 of the Code of Criminal Procedure (CPP). He was brought before the Criminal Court on 19 May 2009 for refusing to give the sample.
By judgment of 27 October 2009, the Bayonne Regional Court imposed on the applicant a fine of five hundred euros.
On 3 February 2011 the Pau Court of Appeal upheld that judgment. As regards the legal aspect of the offence, it stated, in particular, that unlike the applicants in the case of S. and Marper v. the United Kingdom ([GC], nos. 30562/04 and 30566/04, ECHR 2008), the applicant had been convicted, rather than suspected, of an offence, which precluded him from arguing that the impugned judgment had entailed a disproportionate interference with his private life. Relying, in particular, on the 16 September 2010 decision of the Constitutional Council (see paragraph 16 below), it held that “the provisions of national law applied [to the applicant] were such as to reconcile respect for private life and the protection of public order in a manner that was neither manifestly unbalanced nor in breach of the requirements of Article 8 of the Convention”. In connection with the substantive aspect of the offence, the Court of Appeal dismissed the applicant’s plea that a sample had already been taken from his headgear during his police custody and that he was entitled to refuse further sampling, given that there had been no DNA profiling the first time.
The applicant lodged an appeal on points of law. His first plea was that the sample geared to identifying his DNA and storing the corresponding data amounted to a disproportionate interference with his private life, having regard to the duration of the data storage and his personal situation (an easily identifiable person who was socially well-established, with a job, a family and a fixed abode). In his second plea, he argued that the Court of Appeal had provided no reasons for its decision in connection with the substantive aspect of the offence.
By judgment of 28 September 2011, the Court of Cassation dismissed the applicant’s appeal on points of law as follows:
“... the Court of Appeal responded adequately and cogently to the main points of the pleadings submitted to it, and characterised all the substantive and purposive aspects of the offence of refusing to undergo a biological test, of which it found the defendant guilty, in full compliance with the provisions of Article 8 of the Convention.”
The relevant provisions of the CPP concerning the national computerised DNA database read as follows:
“The purpose of the national computerised DNA database, which is supervised by a member of the national legal service, is to centralise all DNA data obtained by the biological analysis and DNA profiling of persons found guilty of one of the offences listed in Article 706-55, with a view to facilitating efforts to locate and identify the perpetrators of those offences. ...
DNA profiles of persons concerning whom there is serious or corroborative circumstantial evidence pointing to their likely involvement in the perpetration of any of the offences mentioned in Article 706-55 shall also be stored in the database further to a decision by a police officer acting ex officio or at the request of the State Prosecutor or the investigating judge, which decision must be included mentioned in the case file. Such profiles may be deleted at the request of the State Prosecutor where their retention has become unnecessary for the purposes of the database. Where the data subject requests such deletion, the State Prosecutor must inform him or her of the action taken on his or her request; if the public prosecutor does not order the deletion, the person concerned may apply to the liberties and detention judge to contest that decision. An appeal shall lie with the president of the investigation division against the latter judge’s decision.
....”
“The national DNA database shall centralise DNA samples concerning the following offences:
...
Crimes against humanity and crimes and offences of deliberate attempts on life, acts of torture and barbarity, deliberate violence, threats against persons, narcotics trafficking, infringement of persons’ freedom, human trafficking, procuring, exploitation of begging and endangerment of minors ...
...”
“I.- A police officer may conduct or order, under his own supervision, in respect of the persons mentioned in the first, second and third indents of Article 706-54, biological testing with a view to DNA profiling. ...
...
- Any refusal to undergo the DNA sampling as provided for in the first indent of paragraph I above shall be punishable with one year’s imprisonment and a fine of 15,000 euros.
...”
“...
- Further to a decision by the State Prosecutor or the Principal State Prosecutor, DNA profiles based on biological testing of persons convicted with final effect of one of the offences listed in Article 706-55 shall be registered in the database.”
“Registered information may be retained for a maximum of forty years from:
... the date on which the conviction became final ... in the case of the profiles mentioned in paragraph II of Article R. 53-10.
...”
In reply to a parliamentary question, the Minister of Justice stated that a draft Decree proposed amending Article R. 53-14 CPP to vary the length of data storage according to the nature of the offence committed and whether or not the perpetrator was under age (Question no. 86834, Assemblée Nationale, Official Gazette of 19 April 2016, p. 3447).
On 16 September 2010 the Constitutional Council, to which the Court of Cassation had submitted a priority request for a preliminary ruling on constitutionality on 17 June 2010, gave a decision declaring Articles 706-54 to 706-56 CPP, as worded prior to Law No. 2010-242 of 10 March 2010, in conformity with the Constitution, subject to paragraphs 18 and 19 of the decision, which read as follows:
“18. Considering ... that the registration in the DNA database on persons convicted of specific offences and persons in respect of whom there is strong or corroborated evidence that they have committed one of those offences is necessary for identifying and apprehending the perpetrators of such crimes or offences; that the last indent of Article 706-54 states that the duration of storage of the information registered should be specified in a separate decree; that, accordingly, it is incumbent on the regulating authority to ensure that the duration of storage of such personal data, in view of the purpose of the database, is proportional to the nature and/or the seriousness of the offences in question ...”.
...
In a judgment of 11 July 2012 (Cass. crim., no. 12-81.533) declining to refer to the Constitutional Council the priority request for a preliminary ruling on constitutionality formulated by the appellant, the Court of Cassation held that the provisions of Articles 706-54 to 706-56 CPP, as worded prior to Law No. 2010-242 of 10 March 2010, had been declared compatible with the Constitution by Constitutional Council decision of 16 September 2010. In its judgment delivered in the same case on 19 March 2013, the Court of Cassation dismissed the appeal on points of law as follows:
“... given that DNA profiling amounts to an interference with the exercise of the right to respect for private life, it is a measure which is not manifestly disproportionate, which is necessary in a democratic society for the prevention of public disorder and criminal offences and which is applicable, without discrimination, to all persons convicted of the offences listed in Article 706-55 of the Code of Criminal Procedure ....”
See S. and Marper v. the United Kingdom [GC], nos. 30562/04 and 30566/04, §§ 41-55, 4 December 2008.