The present case concerns, primarily, the applicant’s rights under Article 8 of the Convention and her complaint under Article 6 of the Convention about the domestic courts’ refusal to consider on the merits her claim relating to the exhumation and transfer of her husband’s remains from one grave to another. The applicant complained that the State had thus unlawfully interfered with her private and family life under Article 8.
The applicant was born in 1945 and lives in Trebinje, Bosnia and Herzegovina (BIH). She was represented by Mr Vujović, a lawyer practising in Podgorica, Montenegro.
The Government were represented by their Agent, Ms V. Pavličić.
The facts of the case, as submitted by the parties, may be summarised as follows.
On 13 January 1995 the applicant’s husband died in Belgrade, Serbia. The applicant submitted that owing to the ongoing armed conflict in BIH at the time it had not been possible for him to be buried in Trebinje, where they had lived and had a family burial plot (porodična grobnica). Instead, he was buried in a burial plot in Montenegro, owned by his nephew. In her observations she submitted that the burial plot in Trebinje was owned by her.
On 1 June 2014 the applicant contacted her husband’s nephew, seeking his consent for the exhumation of her husband’s remains. On 6 June 2014 the nephew refused to give his consent.
On 19 September 2014 the applicant instituted civil proceedings against her husband’s nephew. She lodged a claim with the courts, asking for it to be established that she had the right to carry out an exhumation of her husband’s remains and to transfer them to their burial plot in BIH. She proposed that the identification and separation of her husband’s remains be carried out by court experts, at her expense.
In his response to the applicant’s claim, the nephew submitted that the applicant’s husband – his uncle – had never lived in Trebinje, but had lived in Belgrade. He submitted, as evidence, a number of his uncle’s personal documents. He also maintained that his uncle’s last wish, as witnessed by his sister, had been that he be buried in Montenegro, close to the house of his birth. Furthermore, his uncle’s remains were not in a separate bag, but were at the bottom of the grave, mingled with the remains of other family members buried there. Notably, his uncle’s father had been buried there prior to his uncle, as well as – after his uncle – his uncle’s brother and sister-in-law (the nephew’s parents) and another relative (the nephew’s daughter). The nephew considered that it would be inhumane to sift through their remains and to act in contravention of his uncle’s last wish.
On 2 February 2015 the Court of First Instance (Osnovni sud) in Herceg Novi rejected (odbacuje) the applicant’s claim:
“The court found that the applicant had no legal interest (pravni interes) in lodging such a claim, given that she did not have – nor could she have – any rights to the mortal remains, in the sense of property-related relationships (u smislu svojinskih odnosa), regardless of whose remains were at stake, and nor could she have any rights arising from their place of burial, be they property-related or status-related or in any other sense.
... [T]he claim ... lacked grounds in the form of a right or legal relationship that the applicant could have on the basis of a possible decision in her favour.
...
As the claim is directed at establishing the right to exhume the mortal remains of her husband – from which right, as described, [the applicant] cannot have any legal benefit, and nor does any legal result depend on that right – it is clear that [the applicant] has no legal interest in [lodging] this claim.”
The court referred to section 188, in conjunction with section 276(1)(6), of the Civil Procedure Act (see paragraphs 19-20 below).
On 20 February 2015 the applicant appealed. She submitted that she had both a moral and a legal interest in having her husband’s remains buried in theirs, and not somebody else’s, burial plot. She asked the court to establish her right to carry out an exhumation without the consent of the grave’s owner, as she could not do so without that right. She also relied on a decision delivered by the Supreme Court of Montenegro in 1994 (Rev. br. 153/94), which had found that giving a ruling on the transfer of mortal remains from one grave to another was within the competence of the ordinary courts.
On 20 April 2015 the High Court (Viši sud) in Podgorica upheld the first-instance decision, endorsing its reasoning. In addition, it held that the procedure for exhuming and transferring mortal remains was regulated by special Rules (Pravilnik) on the Conditions and Methods of Exhuming and Transferring Deceased Persons. In particular, the administrative body in charge of sanitary monitoring (nadležni organ uprave za poslove sanitarnog nadzora; “sanitary inspectorate”) issued special permits for exhumation and transfer, and established conditions in respect thereof, but acquiring such a permit required opening special proceedings.
On 26 June 2015 the applicant lodged a constitutional appeal, citing Articles 32 and 40 of the Constitution (see paragraphs 16 and 17 below). She submitted, in particular, that the basis for her claim was to obtain the nephew’s consent, as without it no permission for exhumation could be issued or transfer carried out. She had therefore no other way to exercise her right except through the courts. By rejecting her claim the courts had left her subject to the will (samovolja) of the respondent party. The fact that the Montenegrin legislation did not regulate all issues relating to burials and the transfer of mortal remains did not mean that she had no right to transfer her husband’s remains. She maintained that thereby she had been deprived of her right to fair trial, and the right to family life in a broader sense. She also referred to the Supreme Court’s decision of 1994 (see paragraph 10 above). She furthermore submitted that the courts in the surrounding region, such as the Zagreb Municipality Court and the Zagreb County Court, had ruled on claims relating to the exhumation and transfer of mortal remains from one burial place to another.
On 14 February 2017 the Constitutional Court dismissed the applicant’s constitutional appeal. It considered, under Article 32 of the Constitution, that the reasoning of the ordinary courts had not been arbitrary and that the applicant should have initiated proceedings before the relevant administrative body. The applicant had also failed to submit as evidence the Supreme Court’s decision of 1994. As the Supreme Court only kept case files for five years, after which they were destroyed, the case that she had referred to had most probably been destroyed too. Moreover, the practice of the courts in the region was irrelevant. As regards Article 40 of the Constitution the court held that the applicant had only relied on it “without giving constitutionally acceptable reasons for finding a violation in that regard” and therefore found it manifestly ill-founded. That decision was served on the applicant on 19 May 2017.
On 20 August 2019 the public utility company of the town of Nikšić (Javno komunalno preduzeće “Komunalno Nikšić”) informed the applicant that the exhumation and transfer of mortal remains was not allowed without the consent of the owner of the burial plot in question and a permit from the local sanitary inspectorate.
On 21 August 2019 the sanitary inspectorate informed the applicant by letter that the sanitary inspector was in charge of issuing exhumation and transfer permits. The relevant regulations did not stipulate whether in such cases the consent of the owner of the burial plot in question was necessary or not; nevertheless, the sanitary inspectorate verified whether there were any disputes in that regard. If there was such a dispute the parties were to be instructed first to resolve the issue in question, and only then to lodge a request for exhumation and transfer with the inspectorate. The letter furthermore stated that the inspectorate did not know who had authority to resolve disputes but assumed that it was the courts.
Article 32 provides the right to a fair trial.
Article 40 provides the right to respect private and family life.
Article 58 guarantees the right to property.
Section 188 provides that a claimant can request the courts only to establish the existence or non-existence of a certain right. Such a claim can be lodged when a claimant has a legal interest in the courts establishing the existence or non-existence of a certain right.
Section 276(1)(6) provides that a court shall reject such a claim if, inter alia, the claimant has no legal interest in seeking declaratory relief (tužba za utvrđenje).
Articles 410 and 411 provide the criminal offences of violation of a cadaver and violation of a grave, respectively.
Article 410 provides that whoever exhumes, takes away, hides or destroys a cadaver or a part thereof or ashes or other mortal remains, without authorisation (neovlašćeno), shall be fined or imprisoned for up to one year.
Article 411 provides that whoever sifts through, demolishes, damages or grossly violates a grave, without authorisation, shall be fined or imprisoned for up to one year. The same penalty is provided for those who destroy, damage, remove or grossly violate a gravestone (spomenik) or another grave marking (spomen obilježje). Article 411a provides that whoever damages, destroys, alters without authorisation, amends, replaces or removes a grave marking, or places a grave marking that is not allowed, shall be sentenced to between one and three years in prison.
Section 5 provided that it was the municipal body in charge of sanitary monitoring that issued permission and determined conditions for the exhumation and transfer of a deceased person within the territory of the Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia. Section 7 provided that the exhumation and the transfer across the country’s border of a deceased person for burial could be undertaken only after obtaining (i) a permit issued by the national Sanitary Inspectorate, with the consent of the Ministry of Interior, and (ii) a transit permit (sprovodnica) issued by the municipal body in charge of sanitary monitoring, a representative of which had to be present at the exhumation.
Section 6 provides, inter alia, that everybody is obliged to refrain from breaching other people’s property rights.
On an unspecified date before April 1995 an unspecified first-instance court rejected a claim lodged by A. seeking that B. remove the mortal remains of B.’s aunt from a certain burial plot. The court held that it did not have authority to rule on the transfer of mortal remains from one grave to another. That judgment was upheld by a second-instance court. On 30 April 1995 the Supreme Court (Rev. br. 153/94) upheld the finding that the local sanitary inspectorate was in charge of issuing permits for the removal of mortal remains, but it held that in the case at issue A. had a right to use the burial plot in question, and that that was a property-related right on the basis of which she could seek a court’s protection if she considered that her rights as a co-user of that burial plot had been breached. In other words, it was only through the courts that it was possible to regulate the use of a burial plot by its co-users; the claimant was thus authorised to seek the protection of that right before the courts.
On 24 November 2014 the Court of First Instance in Nikšić found X guilty of violating a cadaver and gave him a suspended sentence. The court found that X had started to construct an ossuary (kosturnica) without permission at the place where Y had been buried. When he had located Y’s mortal remains, X had put them into a plastic bag and had then placed them in a church, for which he had not been given permission. That decision was upheld by the High Court in Podgorica on 12 February 2015.
On 26 November 2014 the Court of First Instance in Rožaje found Z guilty of violating a grave by removing, without permission, a grave marking from the grave of S. On an unspecified date thereafter that decision became final.
On 11 November 2015 the Court of First Instance in Rožaje ruled in favour of the claimants and ordered Z to return the grave marking to S.’s grave within fifteen days. At the same time the court dismissed a request lodged by the claimants for Z to be ordered to remove the mortal remains of his father from S.’s grave, as it found that Z’s father had not been buried there. That decision was upheld by the High Court in Bijelo Polje on 21 December 2015.
In September and October 2018 the sanitary inspectorate (Uprava za inspekcijske poslove – odsjek za zdravstveno-sanitarnu inspekciju) issued three decisions allowing the exhumation, transfer and fresh burial of the mortal remains of three persons within Montenegro. In none of those cases was there any relevant dispute among the parties involved.