The present case concerns the disclosure of confidential medical information about the applicant through the inclusion of such information in a certificate which the applicant has to produce in a variety of situations.
The applicant was born in 1978 and lives in Sângera. He was represented by Mr A. Lungu, a lawyer practising in Durlești.
The Government were represented by their Agent, Mr O. Rotari.
The facts of the case, as submitted by the parties, may be summarised as follows.
The applicant is HIV positive. In 2011 he underwent a medical examination at the Chișinău Military Centre in order to obtain a military service record book. He informed the doctors of his illness and they confirmed it. On 11 July 2011 the Military Centre issued him with a certificate in place of the military service record book (“the exemption certificate”), according to which he was exempted from military service under Section 5 of the Medical Standards (Baremul Medical) provided for in Defence Ministry order no. 177 of 2003 (see paragraph 10 below). The certificate was issued on the basis of the model for such certificates, adopted by Government decision no. 864 of 17 August 2005 (see paragraph 11 below).
When obtaining his national identity card, which under domestic law is mandatory for everyone (see paragraph 8 below), the applicant had to produce his military service record book or the exemption certificate. He complied with this obligation when he renewed his identity card in August 2011.
Under section 4(c) of the Law on administrative proceedings (no. 793-XIV of 10 February 2000), in force at the relevant time, Government decisions of a normative character were exempt from judicial supervision.
Under section 7 of the Law on identity papers in the national passport system (no. 273-XIII of 9 November 1994), citizens of the Republic of Moldova residing in the country must have an identity card from the age of 16.
Under section 44(5) of the Law on preparing citizens for the defence of the Motherland (no. 1245-XV of 18 July 2002), as in force at the time of the events, the competent authority could issue passports and record a change of residence for recruits or reservists only after the latter had been registered with the military or officially exempted from such registration.
Section 5 of the Medical Standards (Baremul Medical) provided for in Defence Ministry order no. 177 of 2003, as published in the Official Gazette and as in force at the time of the events, read as follows:
“In the case of immunodeficiency disorders with a congenital or acquired character, accompanied by pathological changes in the haematopoietic system or other organs, the fitness for military service and military specialisation shall be determined depending on the degree to which the functioning of the organ or organ system is affected, in accordance with the relevant paragraphs of the Medical Standards”.
Under Annex 8 to the Government decision no. 864 of 17 August 2005 as in force at the relevant time, exemption certificates were to be issued in accordance with the model provided. In particular, they had to indicate the reason for the exemption from military service as follows:
“Ground: Section ___ of the Medical Standards (order of the Defence Ministry no. ____ of ____)”, where the issuing authority would fill in the blank spaces with the relevant information.
The applicant referred to the case of B., who was also HIV positive and who had asked the courts to order the competent authorities to issue him with an exemption certificate without indicating the specific section of the Medical Standards (Section 5), so as to avoid disclosing his illness to third parties. By a final judgment of 15 April 2010 the Supreme Court of Justice rejected that request. The court found that the Military Centre had acted lawfully, having followed the model for exemption certificates as set out in Government decision no. 864 of 17 August 2005. B.’s certificate did not expressly indicate the exact type of illness from which he was suffering and Section 5 of the Medical Standards covered several types of illnesses; hence, the certificate did not identify the exact type of illness in B.’s case. Moreover, the certificate was to be submitted only to a limited number of State authorities. Accordingly, no disclosure of confidential information had taken place.
In subsequent proceedings B. lodged a complaint against a public medical institution which provided information to the Chișinău Military Centre about young men registered with that institution as having certain types of illnesses. His complaints were rejected by the Chișinău Court of Appeal on 7 February 2012 and by the Supreme Court of Justice on 21 June 2012. The courts noted, inter alia, that the Supreme Court of Justice had already established in its decision of 15 April 2010 that indicating the specific section of the Medical Standards in the exemption certificate did not amount to disclosing confidential medical information.
Article 38 of the Code of Constitutional Jurisdiction (law no. 502-XIII, in force since 28 September 1995), exhaustively lists the circle of persons and institutions which may bring a case before the Constitutional Court. Individual litigants do not have that power.
In its judgment no. 13 of 6 November 2012 the Moldovan Constitutional Court, at the request of the Ombudsman, declared unconstitutional the part of the Government decision no. 864 of 17 August 2005 requiring the specific section of the Medical Standards to be indicated in the exemption certificate. The court noted, in particular, that the medical information concerning the illness which had served as the ground for the exemption from military service was given in coded form in the exemption certificate by means of reference to sections of the Medical Standards, so as to avoid divulging such information to third parties. However, since the Medical Standards as well as the relevant Defence Ministry order had been published in the Official Gazette and were identified by date and number in the exemption certificate, the public could have access to this information and thus the coding did not ensure its confidentiality. At the same time, the legislation made it a requirement to produce military registration documents when applying for identity documents or signing a work contract and in other cases provided for by law, including to private companies which so requested. The court found that this constituted a disproportionate interference with the right to protection of private life.
Following this judgment of the Constitutional Court, the Government amended its decision no. 864 mentioned above and excluded the requirement of indicating the ground for the exemption from military service (Government decision no. 135 of 22 February 2013).