The case originated in an application (no. 13703/04) against the  lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by two Russian nationals, Mr Viktor Ivanovich Vasilyev and Mr Vasiliy Grigoryevich Kovtun (“the applicants”), on 22 March 2004.
The applicants were represented by Mr  P.A. Pursiainen, a lawyer practising in . The Russian Government (“the Government”) were initially represented by Ms V. Milinchuk, and subsequently by Mr G. Matyushkin, the former and current Representatives of the  at the European Court of Human Rights respectively.
On 19 June 2007 the President of the First Section decided to give notice of the application to the Government. It was also decided to rule on the admissibility and merits of the application at the same time (Article 29 § 1). On 18 January 2011 the parties were asked to submit further observations under Rule 54 § 2 (c) of the Rules of Court.
The applicants were born in 1951 and 1947 and live in  and Sosnoviy Bor (Leningrad Region) respectively.
As can be seen from a pro forma invoice dated 7 April 1999 and submitted by the first applicant (Mr Vasilyev), a private company named Nissan Trading Europe Limited offered to undertake to sell him a car and to ship it to him. The invoice indicated the means of shipping (CIF Helsinki) and the details concerning the car, including its price, namely 11,900  dollars (USD). The second applicant (Mr Kovtun) submitted a similar invoice dated 30 March 1999 for a car priced at USD 14,900.
In July 1999 the applicants submitted customs declarations and the above invoices to the Russian customs authorities for clearance. The applicants applied for a waiver of customs duties, considering that their status under the Chernobyl-related legislation entitled them to such an exemption. On 5 August 1999 the Sosnovoborsk Town Court of the Leningrad Region ordered the customs authorities to release the second applicant’s car for use without payment of any customs duties. The President of the  applied for supervisory review of this decision. On 10 December 1999 the Presidium of the  (“the Presidium”) granted his request, and set aside the judgment of 5 August 1999. The Presidium considered that on the date of the application for customs clearance, the second applicant had no entitlement to an exemption. It appears that proceedings to the same effect also took place in respect of the first applicant.
In the meantime, on 27 July 1999 the national authorities instituted criminal proceedings (case no. 990666) against unspecified persons in relation to numerous unlawful imports of cars from abroad. On 12 and 16 August 1999 an investigator issued charging orders in respect of a large number of cars, including the above-mentioned cars which had been submitted for customs clearance by the applicants. They were interviewed as witnesses. It was established that the applicants’ situation was not related to the circumstances of case no. 990666. The said charging orders were accordingly annulled.
It appears that in or around September 2000 the applicants were requested to provide additional documents in order to finalise the customs clearance. When they did not comply with this requirement in time, the customs authority impounded the cars and placed them in the hands of a State-owned enterprise.
In November 2000 the applicants offered to pay the required customs duty for customs clearance of the cars. They also unsuccessfully sought permission to take the cars out of Russian territory, citing financial hardship.
On 14 and 22 November 2000 customs officers compiled reports on the applicants’ alleged violation of applicable customs regulations and applied for confiscation orders on account of the applicants’ alleged non-declaration of imported goods, in breach of Article 279 § 1 of the Customs Code.
By judgments of 24 July 2002 the , with Judge P. sitting in a single-judge formation, issued confiscation orders in respect of the cars. The judge held as follows:
“[The second applicant] was mentioned as the owner of the car submitted for customs clearance...The customs inquiry and the criminal inquiry concerning forgery of authority forms established that [the second applicant] had been contacted by a certain Sergey, whom he did not know, and had been asked to carry out, for a fee, the customs clearance of a car for him (Sergey). On 17 July 1999 [the second applicant] had forged an authority form for importing a specific car from abroad. He had not signed any other document for the customs authorities, and had not handed over any money to buy the car. As he explained, he indeed had signed an authority form and had submitted the clearance documents, whereas the car had been paid for by Sergey. [The second applicant] had been present during the customs inspection of the car. He claims to be the car owner. However, a handwriting expert report indicates that while [the second applicant] has signed the authority form, the customs declaration has been signed by another person. Thus, [the second applicant] has not properly carried out the customs clearance.
The investigating authorities issued a charging order in respect of the car... On 23 June 2000 the charging order was revoked... On 27 September 2000 [the second applicant] was informed of the need to process the customs clearance ... but he did not comply with the required time-limits. Thus he committed a violation of the customs regulations, in breach of Article 279 § 1 of the Customs Code... No fine can be imposed, owing to the expiry of the liability time-limits... [The second applicant] should be held liable and the car should be seized as the direct object of the customs offence... Such confiscation may be imposed irrespective of the principal or subsidiary nature of the penalty ... and may be imposed within three years of the date of the violation of the customs regulations. Under Article 380 of the Code it does not matter whether the person responsible for the violation owned the vehicle to be seized as the object of the offence. Also, it does not matter whether the owner has been established...”
A judgment in similar terms was issued by the judge also in respect of the first applicant. The applicants had not been notified of the hearing and did not attend it.
Having learnt about the above judgments, on 29 July and 2 August 2002 the applicants’ representatives lodged appeals.
Despite the pending appeal proceedings, on 6 August 2002 the confiscation orders were submitted to the local bailiffs’ office for execution. The orders bore the ’s stamp, indicating that they had become final, and were signed by Judge P. and the court registrar.
On 8 August 2002 the bailiff handed over the cars to a State enterprise, which subsequently sold them.
On 27 November 2002 the  examined the applicants’ appeals against the confiscation orders of 24 July 2002 and annulled them on the ground that the  had had no jurisdiction to hear the case. The case was remitted for examination by the Primorskiy District Court of St Petersburg.
On 5 February 2003 the Primorskiy District Court held the following:
“As follows from Article 4.5 of the Code of Administrative Offences in force since 1 July 2002, a decision concerning a customs offence cannot be issued after the expiry of one year from the date on which the offence was committed. Under Article 24.5 § 6 of the Code, administrative offence proceedings cannot be initiated or continued if the time-limits for liability have expired. Since the offence was committed more than one year ago, the proceedings should be discontinued...
The car ... and the documents should be returned to the lawful holder after the necessary customs clearance. If the holder cannot be identified, what should be done with the car should be considered in civil court proceedings...”
No appeal was lodged against this decision, which accordingly became final.
The applicants sought the institution of criminal proceedings against Judge P., who had wrongly allowed the enforcement of the confiscation orders to proceed before the appeal proceedings against these orders had been determined. By a letter of 7 May 2003 the Prosecutor’s Office of the Leningrad Region dismissed their request, noting that the confiscation orders had been annulled. The regional Judges Qualifications Board also refused to deal with the applicants’ complaint.
In addition, the applicants, acting through Mr Pursiainen, brought civil proceedings against the Judicial Department of the Supreme Court of the , the Ministry of Justice and the customs office. They claimed compensation for the pecuniary loss caused to them by the premature execution of the confiscation orders. The applicants complained that the reports of 14 and 22 November 2000 (see paragraph 10 above) had been unlawfully compiled in their absence, that they had not been notified of those reports and that the customs office had applied to the wrong court for the confiscation orders. According to the applicants, the bailiffs had unlawfully initiated enforcement proceedings and should have declined jurisdiction in favour of another bailiffs’ office. The applicants contended as follows:
“The disposal of the cars was rendered possible owing to the violation of the legislation by the officials of the customs office, the judge of the  and the bailiff. An individual violation by one of those public officials could not have, in itself, resulted in the unlawful disposal of the cars which caused pecuniary damage... The actions of the above authorities, taken in their entirety, have caused significant pecuniary damage.”
The applicants relied on Article 6 of the Convention, Article 53 of the Constitution and the Constitutional Court’s ruling of 25 January 2001, as well as Article 322, Article 1064 and Article 1070 § 2 of the Civil Code (see paragraphs 25 and 28-30 below).
By a procedural decision of 30 June 2003 the Oktyabrskiy Court of the Admiralteyskiy District of St Petersburg held that the case could not be examined. Referring to Articles 132 and 136 of the Code of Civil Procedure, the court held that the action for damages required evidence of a prior criminal conviction of a judge. Thus, the applicants were required to submit a copy of such a judgment.
In November 2003 the applicants wrote to the above court, inquiring about the state of the proceedings in their case. The District Court replied, restating the contents of the decision of 30 June 2003. Considering that the applicants had not received a copy of that decision, the court allowed them to submit the required documents by 11 December 2003. Alternatively, they were informed of their right to lodge an appeal against the decision of 30 June 2003, also seeking that the expired time-limit for an appeal be extended on account of a valid reason.
The applicants’ lawyer appealed, relying on the ruling of the Constitutional Court of 25 January 2001 (see paragraph 29 below), and arguing that a criminal court judgment was not indispensable in the circumstances.
On 28 January 2004 the St Petersburg City Court examined the appeal and endorsed the reasoning of the decision of 30 June 2003.
On 1 March 2004 the District Court established that the applicants had not complied with the decision of 30 June 2003, and thus discontinued the case. The applicants did not appeal.
Article 132 of the Code of Civil Procedure of 2002 (“the CCP”) provides that a statement of claim is to be accompanied by, inter alia, documents confirming the circumstances underlying the claims. The claimant’s failure to comply with the requirements of Article 132 would result in the court refraining from examining the case and affording the claimant a time-limit for remedying the shortcoming. If the shortcoming has not been remedied within the time-limit provided, the statement of claim should be treated as never having been lodged and should be returned to the claimant (Article 136).
The Constitutional Court of Russia considered that a judge had a discretionary power, including a power to establish a reasonable time-limit for remedying shortcomings in such claims. The judge’s discretionary power was aimed at ensuring the correct and timely examination of civil cases, and did not violate a claimant’s rights. In any event, the claimant could resubmit his statement of claim in new proceedings (see, among others, decision no. 1463-О-О of 25 November 2010). The judge should issue a reasoned decision concerning a refusal to process a case (see, among others, decision no. 68-О-О of 25 January 2007).
The Constitutional Court has also held, with reference to Articles 134 and 13 of the CCP, that the absence of a special statute concerning jurisdictional matters for claims against unlawful actions or inaction on the part of a judge did not imply that this type of cases should not be governed by the general jurisdictional rules of the CCP (see, among others, decision no. 431-О-О of 19 June 2007, and decision no. 233-О-О of 19 March 2009). Any other interpretation would result in a denial of access to court, and a denial of compensation for damage (see decision no. 210-O of 27 May 2004). In the absence of a special legal regulation (concerning the grounds and procedure for claiming compensation from the State in respect of damage caused by unlawful actions or inaction on the part of a court or a judge), the courts should directly apply the relevant provisions of the Constitution (see decision no. 685-О-О of 26 May 2011).
Article 392 of the CCP contains a list of situations which may justify the reopening of a finalised case on account of newly discovered circumstances. By a ruling of 26 February 2010 the Constitutional Court of Russia indicated that this Article should be interpreted as, in principle, allowing the launching of a procedure to have a final judgment re-examined on account of newly discovered circumstances, such as the finding of a violation of the European Convention in a given case by the European Court of Human Rights (see also the Constitutional Court’s decision no. 853-О-О of 7 June 2011). Article 392 of the Code was amended accordingly with effect from 1 January 2012.
Article 1069 of the Civil Code (“the Code”) provides that loss sustained as a result of unlawful actions or inaction on the part of public authorities or their officials should be compensated. Loss sustained as a result of the administration of justice is recoverable if the judge’s fault has been established in criminal proceedings (Article 1070 § 2 of the Code).
By a ruling of 25 January 2001, the  provided an interpretation of Article 1070 § 2 of the Code. It held that a judge’s criminal conviction was a necessary element for a claim for damages on account of an unlawful judicial decision issued by that judge in the context of civil proceedings. However, a criminal conviction was not required if the claim concerned loss or damage sustained through other violations in judicial proceedings, such as, for instance, a failure to examine the case within a reasonable time. The  held that the federal legislature should adopt a legislative framework governing that second category of tort claims and, in particular, clarifying the grounds for recovering damages and related jurisdictional matters.
The  indicated that the absence of the above-mentioned legislative framework should not serve as a reason for refusing to deal with a case. The absence of such a framework did not imply the inapplicability of the general rules concerning the grounds and procedure for establishing State liability or concerning jurisdictional matters (see decision no. 210-O of 27 May 2004 and decision no. 278-O-П
“Administration of justice is a special type of State authority. When applying a general legal rule in the circumstances of a given case, a judge provides an interpretation of the rule, takes a decision within the scope of his (at times wide) margin of appreciation provided by the law and, often, assesses the circumstances without the benefit of sufficient information... A party to court proceedings benefiting from an annulment or amendment of a judgment by a higher court is entitled to consider that that judgment had not been in compliance with the law through the judge’s fault... Article 1070 § 2 excludes a presumption of culpability on the tortfeasor’s part, and requires the establishment of the judge’s guilt in a criminal judgment as an additional condition of State liability... Thus, Article 1070 § 2 links State liability to a criminal act of a judge, which was premeditated or owing to the improper exercise of his powers ... when examining a case and taking a judicial decision...The above does not preclude compensation in respect of damage caused in other circumstances or contexts, when the judge’s guilt may be established by a court decision outside the sphere of criminal law...”
Article 380 of the Customs Code provided that the execution of a confiscation order could only occur after the expiry of the time-limit for appeal. Confiscation could proceed irrespective of whether or not the goods to be confiscated were owned by the person who had been found to be in breach of the customs regulations, for instance under Article 279 of the Code concerning the non-declaration of imported goods. By a ruling of 14 May 1999 the  held that Article 380 was in compliance with the Constitution. The court noted that frequently the person charged with a customs offence, for instance the person omitting to make a customs declaration, was not necessarily the owner of the goods to be cleared; the person could be just a carrier or an intermediary, such as a customs broker.
Article 380 of the Code ceased to have effect on 1 July 2002.
Civil rights and obligations are conferred by virtue of legal grounds prescribed by law, such as contracts, acts of public authorities if required by law, or a court judgment. An entitlement concerning property, which should be subject to State registration, arises, as a rule, from the moment of such registration (Article 8 of the Civil Code). The Russian Government’s Decree no. 938 of 12 August 1994 required State registration of vehicles, including those imported from abroad.
Under Article 167 of the Civil Code, a voided transaction does not give rise to any legal consequences beyond those related to its annulment, and is void ab initio. In the case of a voided transaction, the parties should return to each other what they have received or, if this is not practicable, they should pay compensation. Under Article 302 of the Civil Code, the original owner can claim property back from a bona fide purchaser who has acquired it from an unauthorised seller without knowing or being in a position to know that the seller was unauthorised. However, such a claim can only arise if the property was lost, stolen, or otherwise taken out of the original owner’s control.
In accordance with a ruling of 25 February 1998 by the Plenary Session of the Supreme Commercial Court of Russia (“the ruling”), if a property had been sold at a public auction held in compliance with the Enforcement Proceedings Act, the court should grant the owner’s claim for restitution of his property under Article 302 of the Civil Code if the property sold had been lost by the owner or had been stolen from him, or had otherwise been taken out of his control; the above should be applied even against a bona fide purchaser of the property (paragraph 26 of the ruling).
By a ruling of 21 April 2003, the  interpreted Article 167 of the Civil Code as not allowing the original owner to reclaim his property from a bona fide purchaser, unless there was a special legislative provision to this effect. Instead, a claim vindicating prior rights (виндикационный иск) could be lodged under Article 302 of the Civil Code.