The case originated in an application (no. 57813/00) against the  lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by four Austrian nationals, Ms S. H., Mr D.H., Ms. H. E.-G. and Mr M.G. (“the applicants”), on 8 May 2000. The President of the Chamber acceded to the applicants’ request not to have their names disclosed (Rule 47 § 3 of the Rules of Court).
The applicants were represented by Mr H.F. Kinz and Mr W.L. Weh, both lawyers practising in Bregenz. The Austrian Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Ambassador F. Trauttmansdorff, Head of the International Law Department at the Federal Ministry of Foreign Affairs.
The applicants alleged in particular that the provisions of the Austrian Artificial Procreation Act prohibiting the use of ova from donors and sperm from donors for in vitro fertilisation, the only medical techniques by which they could successfully conceive children, violated their rights under Article 8 of the Convention read alone and in conjunction with Article 14.
By a decision of 15 November 2007 the Court declared the applications partly admissible.
Third-party comments were received from the German Government, which had exercised its right to intervene (Article 36 § 1 of the Convention and Rule 44 § 1 (b)).
A hearing on the merits of the application took place in public in the Human Rights Building, , on 28 February 2008 (Rule 59 § 3).
There appeared before the Court:
The Court heard addresses by Mr Weh, Mr Kinz and Ms Ohms.
The applicants were born in 1966, 1962, 1971 and 1971 respectively and live in L. and R.
The first applicant is married to the second applicant and the third applicant to the fourth applicant.
The first applicant suffers from fallopian-tube-related infertility (eileiterbedingter Sterilität). The second applicant, her husband, is also infertile.
The third applicant suffers from agonadism (Gonadendysgenesie), which means that she does not produce ova at all. Thus she is completely infertile but has a fully developed uterus. The fourth applicant, her husband, in contrast to the second applicant, can produce sperm fit for procreation.
On 4 May 1998 the first and third applicants lodged an application (Individualantrag) with the  (Verfassungsgerichtshof) for a review of the constitutionality of section 3(1) and section 3(2) of the Artificial Procreation Act (Fortpflanzungsmedizingesetz - see Relevant domestic law below).
The applicants argued before the  that they were directly affected by the above provisions. The first applicant submitted that she could not conceive a child by natural means; thus the only way open to her and her husband would be in vitro fertilisation using sperm from a donor. That medical technique was, however, ruled out by section 3(1) and section 3(2) of the Artificial Procreation Act. The third applicant submitted that she was also infertile. Suffering from agonadism, she did not produce ova at all. Thus, the only way open to her of conceiving a child was to resort to a medical technique of artificial procreation referred to as heterologous embryotransfer, which would entail implanting into her uterus an embryo conceived with ova from a donor and sperm from the fourth applicant. However, that method was not allowed under the Artificial Procreation Act.
The first and third applicants argued before the  that the impossibility of using the above-mentioned medical techniques for medically assisted conception was a breach of their rights under Article 8 of the Convention. They also relied on Article 12 of the Convention and on Article 7 of the Federal Constitution, which guarantees equal treatment.
On 4 October 1999 the  held a public hearing in which the first applicant, assisted by counsel, participated.
On 14 October 1999 the  decided on the first and third applicants’ request. The  found that their request was partly admissible in so far as the wording concerned their specific case. In this respect, it found that the provisions of section 3 of the Artificial Procreation Act, which prohibited the use of certain procreation techniques, was directly applicable to the applicants’ case without it being necessary for a decision by a court or administrative authority to be taken.
As regards the merits of their complaints the  considered that Article 8 was applicable in the applicants’ case. Although no case-law of the European Court of Human Rights existed on the matter, it was evident, in the Constitutional Court’s view, that the decision of spouses or a cohabiting couple to conceive a child and make use of medically assisted procreation techniques to that end fell within the sphere of protection under Article 8.
The impugned provisions of the Artificial Procreation Act interfered with the exercise of this freedom in so far as they limited the scope of permitted medical techniques of artificial procreation. As for the justification of such an interference, the  observed that the legislature, when enacting the Artificial Procreation Act, had tried to find a solution by balancing the conflicting interests of human dignity, the right to procreation and the well-being of children. Thus, it had enacted as leading features of the legislation that, in principle, only homologous methods – such as using ova and sperm from the spouses or the cohabiting couple itself – would be allowed and only methods which did not involve a particularly sophisticated technique and were not too far removed from natural means of conception. The aim was to avoid the forming of unusual personal relations such as a child having more than one biological mother (a genetic mother and one carrying the child) and to avoid the risk of exploitation of women.
The use of in vitro fertilisation as opposed to natural procreation raised serious issues as to the well-being of children thus conceived, their health and their rights, and also touched upon the ethical and moral values of society and entailed the risk of commercialisation and selective reproduction (Zuchtauswahl).
Applying the principle of proportionality under Article 8 § 2, however, such concerns could not lead to a total ban on all possible medically assisted procreation techniques, as the extent to which public interests were concerned depended to a large extent on whether a heterologous or homologous technique was used.
In the Constitutional Court’s view, the legislator had not overstepped the margin of appreciation afforded to member States when it established the permissibility of homologous methods as a rule and insemination using donor sperm as an exception. This compromise reflected the current state of medical science and the consensus in society. It did not mean, however, that these criteria were not subject to developments which the legislator would have to take into account in the future.
The legislator had also not neglected the interests of men and women who had to avail themselves of artificial procreation techniques. Besides strictly homologous techniques it had accepted insemination using sperm from donors. Such a technique had been known and used for a long time and would not bring about unusual family relationships. Further, the use of these techniques was not restricted to married couples but also included cohabiting couples. In so far, however, as homologous techniques were not sufficient for the conception of a child the interests of the individuals concerned ran counter to the above-mentioned public interest.
The  also found that for the legislator to prohibit heterologous techniques, while accepting as lawful only homologous techniques, was in accordance with the prohibition of discrimination as contained in the principle of equality. The difference in treatment between the two techniques was justified because, as pointed out above, the same objections could not be raised against the homologous method as against the heterologous one. As a consequence the legislator was not bound to apply strictly identical regulations to both. Also, the fact that insemination with donor sperm was allowed while ova donation was not did not raise a discrimination issue because again, as pointed out above, there was no risk of creating unusual relationships which might adversely affect the well-being of a future child as there was with heterologous insemination.
Since the impugned provisions of the Artificial Procreation Act were in line with Article 8 of the Convention and the principle of equality under the Federal Constitution, there had also been no breach of Article 12 of the Convention.
This decision was served on the first and third applicants’ lawyer on 8 November 1999.
The Artificial Procreation Act (Fortpflanzungsmedizingesetz, Federal Law Gazette 275/1992) regulates the use of medical techniques for inducing conception of a child by means other than copulation (section 1(1)).
These methods comprise: (i) introduction of sperm into the reproductive organs of a woman, (ii) unification of ovum and sperm outside the body of a woman, (iii) introduction of viable cells into the uterus or fallopian tube of a woman and (iv) introduction of ovum cells or ovum cells with sperm into the uterus or fallopian tube of a woman (section 1(2)).
Medically assisted procreation is allowed only within a marriage or a relationship similar to marriage, and may only be carried out if every other possible and reasonable treatment aimed at inducing pregnancy through intercourse has failed or has no reasonable chance of success (section 2).
Under section 3(1), only ova and sperm from spouses or from persons living in a relationship similar to marriage (Lebensgefährten) may be used for the purpose of medically assisted procreation. In exceptional circumstances, sperm from a third person may be used for artificial insemination when introducing sperm into the reproductive organs of a woman (section 3(2)). In all other circumstances, and in particular for the purpose of in vitro fertilisation, the use of sperm by donors is prohibited.
Under section 3(3), ova or viable cells may only be used for the woman from whom they originate. Thus ova donation is always prohibited.
The further provisions of the Artificial Procreation Act stipulate, inter alia, that medically assisted procreation may only be carried out by specialised physicians and in specially equipped hospitals or surgeries (section 4) and with the express and written consent of the spouses or cohabiting persons (section 8).
In 1999 the Artificial Procreation Act was supplemented by a Federal Act Establishing a Fund for Financing In-vitro Fertilisation Treatment (Bundesgesetz mit dem ein Fonds zur Finanzierung der In-vitro-Fertilisiation eingerichtet wird – Federal Law Gazette Part I No. 180/1999) in order to subsidise in–vitro fertilisation treatment allowed under the Artificial Procreation Act.
On the basis of the material available to the Court, including the document “Medically-assisted Procreation and the Protection of the Human Embryo Study on the Solution in 39 States” (Council of Europe, 1998) and the replies by the member States of the Council of Europe to the Steering Committee on Bioethics’ “Questionnaire on Access to Medically-assisted Procreation” (Council of Europe, 2005), it would appear that IVF treatment is regulated by primary or secondary legislation in Austria, Azerbaijan, Bulgaria, Croatia, Denmark, Estonia, France, Georgia, Germany, Greece, Hungary, Iceland, Italy, Latvia, the Netherlands, Norway, the Russian Federation, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, Turkey, Ukraine and the United Kingdom. In Belgium, the Czech Republic, Finland, Ireland, Malta, Lithuania, Poland, Serbia and Slovakia such treatment is governed by clinical practice, professional guidelines, royal or administrative decree or general constitutional principles.
The study in particular sets out the position of domestic law as regards seven different artificial procreation techniques: artificial insemination within a couple, in vitro fertilisation within a couple, artificial insemination by sperm donor, ova donation, ova and sperm donation, embryo donation and intracytoplasmic sperm injection (an  procedure in which a single sperm is injected directly into an ).
As far as can be seen, sperm donation is currently prohibited only in three countries: Italy, Lithuania and , which all ban heterologous assisted fertilisation as a whole. Countries allowing sperm donation do not generally distinguish in their regulations between the use of sperm for artificial insemination and for in vitro fertilisation. As regards the donation of ova, it is prohibited in Croatia, Germany, Norway and , in addition to the three countries mentioned above. Since Germany in practice allows donation of sperm only for non-in vitro fertilisation, the legal situation is quite similar to the situation in .
In a number of countries, such as Cyprus, Luxembourg, Malta, Finland, Poland, Portugal and , where the matter is not regulated, the donation of both sperm and ova is used in practice.
A comparison between the Council of Europe study of 1998 and a survey conducted by the International Federation of Fertility Societies of 2007 shows that in the field of medically assisted procreation legal provisions are developing quickly. In Denmark, France and  sperm and ova donation, which was previously prohibited, is now allowed since the entry into force of new legal provisions in 2006, 2004 and 2006 respectively. In  sperm donation for in vitro fertilisation has been allowed since 2003, but not ova donation.
Principle 11 of the principles adopted by the ad hoc committee of experts on progress in the biomedical sciences, the expert body within the Council of Europe which preceded the present Steering Committee on Bioethics (CAHBI, 1989), states:
“1. In principle, in vitro fertilisation shall be effected using gametes of the members of the couple. The same rule shall apply to any other procedure that involves ova or in vitro or embryos in vitro. However, in exceptional cases defined by the member states, the use of gametes of donors may be permitted. ”
The Convention on Human Rights and Biomedicine of 1997 does not deal with the question of donation of gametes, but forbids to use a medically assisted reproduction technique to choose the sex of a child. Its Article 14 reads as follows:
“The use of techniques of medically assisted procreation shall not be allowed for the purpose of choosing a future child’s sex, except where serious hereditary sex-related disease is to be avoided.”
The Additional Protocol to the above Convention, on Transplantation of Organs and Tissues of Human Origin, of 2002, which promotes donation of organs, expressly excludes from its scope reproductive organs and tissues.