The case originated in an application (no. 61985/12) against the Federal Republic of Germany lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a German national, Mr Gerhard Fleischner (“the applicant”), on 22 September 2012.
The applicant was represented by Ms F. Yavuz, a lawyer practising in Munich. The German Government (“the Government”) were represented by one of their Agents, Mr H.-J. Behrens, of the Federal Ministry of Justice and Consumer Protection.
The applicant alleged, in particular, that in breach of a fair hearing as guaranteed by Article 6 § 1 of the Convention and in breach of the presumption of innocence as guaranteed by Article 6 § 2 of the Convention he had been ordered to pay compensation in liability proceedings, despite the discontinuation of the criminal proceedings against him.
On 12 June 2017 notice of the application was given to the Government.
The applicant was born in 1942 and lives in Schliersee.
The applicant was indicted, together with four co-accused, in criminal proceedings on charges of hostage-taking. They had made financial investments in the United States with the help of their financial adviser, A. When A had allegedly failed to fulfil his contractual obligations, in particular, to pay the interest due and ultimately to refund in full the invested capital, two of the co-accused had kidnapped him and kept him captive in a house in Germany. At a meeting at which the applicant and his co-accused wife had also been present, A had been forced – by threats to inform on him the US police – to sign acknowledgements of debt. After the meeting A had arranged a transfer of 75,000 euros (EUR) to the bank account of one of the co-accused. The police had eventually rescued A.
On 3 February 2010 the criminal proceedings against the applicant were preliminarily, and on 29 August 2011, ultimately discontinued pursuant to Article 206a of the Code of Criminal Procedure (Strafprozessordnung) because he was deemed unfit to stand trial.
At the criminal trial against the remaining co-accused, A testified that the applicant had drafted the acknowledgements of debt and had insisted that he would only be released upon receipt of the EUR 75,000.
On 23 March 2010 the Traunstein Regional Court convicted the coaccused, including the applicant’s wife, of various criminal offences for having blackmailed A into arranging to refund their lost investments. The conviction was essentially based on A’s testimony and on the statements of the co-accused. In its factual statements, based also on other witness testimony, the court described in detail on 16 pages the actions of all the co-accused, including those of the applicant.
Irrespective of the criminal proceedings, A commissioned a lawyer to recover the EUR 75,000. Without initiating civil court proceedings, A’s lawyer sent a written request to the co-accused whose bank account had been used for the financial transaction (see paragraph 6 above). Subsequently, the money was transferred back to A and A then tried, with the help of his lawyer, to claim from the applicant and all co-accused compensation for the lawyer’s fees that had been incurred in this context. However, they declined to compensate A.
Since the applicant and the co-accused did not reimburse the lawyer’s fees for recovering the EUR 75,000, A instituted a civil action against the applicant and the four co-accused, claiming EUR 1,880.20 in compensation for his lawyer’s fees.
On 25 May 2011 the Speyer District Court ordered the service of A’s statement of claim on the applicant and the co-accused and invited them to indicate within two weeks whether they intended to defend themselves in the civil proceedings. Additionally, they were given the opportunity to submit a statement of defence within a further two weeks.
On 5 June 2011 the applicant notified the District Court about his intention to defend himself with the assistance of a lawyer, but he did not submit a statement of defence. He merely added that he “was not for health reasons unfit to stand trial” (“Ich bin nicht aus Krankheitsgründen nicht verhandlungsfähig.”[sic]).
On 5 September 2011 the District Court informed the parties that it considered that A’s claim was justified and that the Traunstein Regional Court’s criminal judgment of 23 March 2010 appeared to be sufficient proof as documentary evidence. It also set a deadline for further comments within two weeks.
On 3 October 2011 the applicant’s wife submitted her statement of defence. She did not deny her and her husband’s participation in the meeting with the kidnapped plaintiff, but denied having committed the criminal offences of which she had been convicted. She argued that she had been informed about the kidnapping only after the said meeting. She requested the District Court to procure the criminal investigation files and to hear testimony from the plaintiff and the applicant.
On 17 October 2011 the applicant informed the District Court that he was unfit to stand trial and submitted a medical report to that effect.
On 19 October 2011 the District Court notified the applicant that his health problems did not exonerate him from the civil proceedings and from attending the hearing on 7 November 2011. However, he could send a representative to the hearing.
On 28 October 2011 the applicant’s wife asked the District Court to take further evidence, in particular to hear the co-accused and to procure the criminal judgment. In support of her arguments she also submitted a sworn written testimony by the applicant in which he described the events and not only denied any involvement on the part of his wife, but also claimed that he had had no knowledge of the kidnapping when A had agreed to transfer the money. The applicant elaborated that he had had the impression that A had been staying voluntarily at the house and maintained that he and his wife had only learned afterwards about the kidnapping.
On 2 November 2011 the District Court received a submission from the applicant, dated 30 October 2011. The applicant, who contrary to his prior announcement had not chosen to be represented by a lawyer, repeated that his health problems required a discontinuation of the civil proceedings. He argued that in the light of the plaintiff’s failure to present sufficient evidence of his participation in any unlawful acts, the health risks for him rendered the proceedings disproportionate. The criminal proceedings had not demonstrated his participation in either the kidnapping or the transfer of the EUR 75,000. The civil action had been based only on allegations, but there was no evidence of the applicant taking charge of or committing an act of coercion against A.
On 7 November 2011 the applicant was represented by his daughter at an oral hearing before the District Court. She applied for the dismissal of the action. The transcript of the hearing did not document any taking of evidence, nor any request in this respect on behalf of the applicant.
On 2 December 2011 the District Court awarded the plaintiff the claimed EUR 1,880.20, plus interest and legal expenses. The applicant and the four co-accused were held liable as joint debtors (Gesamtschuldner) for damages in accordance with Article 823 § 2 of the Civil Code (Bürgerliches Gesetzbuch). As to the basis for civil liability, the judgment referred to the relevant articles of the Civil Code which, for their part, referred to the relevant articles of the Criminal Code (Articles 823 § 2, 840 of the Civil Code, 239, 240 of the Criminal Code) and found on this basis:
“Defendants nos. (1) to (4) [the applicant] have jointly fulfilled the constitutive elements (Tatbestand) of deprivation of liberty under Article 239 of the Criminal Code and of coercion under Article 240 of the Criminal Code.
...
Insofar as defendant no. (4) takes the view that he was not involved in the criminal acts, reference is made to the submission of defendant no. (3) [the applicant’s wife] before the Traunstein Regional Court. Like defendant no. (3), defendant no. (4) failed to end the deprivation of liberty despite knowledge of the circumstances of the plaintiff’s relocation (Verbringung). In addition, reference is made to the plaintiff’s submission before the Traunstein Regional Court. According to that, defendant no. (4) had prepared various documents which the plaintiff had to sign. To that extent, the defendant actively took part in the coercion.”
[„Die Beklagten zu 1) bis 4) haben gemeinschaftlich den Tatbestand der Freiheitsberaubung gem. § 239 StGB und der Nötigung gem. § 240 StGB erfüllt.
...
Soweit der Beklagte zu 4) meint, er sei an den Taten nicht beteiligt gewesen, wird auf die Einlassung der Beklagten zu 3) vor dem LG Traunstein verwiesen. Ebenso wie die Beklagte zu 3) hat es der Beklagte zu 4) trotz Kenntnis von den Umständen der Verbringung des Klägers unterlassen die Freiheitsberaubung zu beenden. Desweiteren wird auf die Einlassung des Klägers vor dem LG Traunstein verwiesen. Nach dieser hat der Beklagte zu 4) diverse Dokumente vorbereitet, die der Kläger unterschreiben musste. Insoweit hat sich der Beklagte aktiv an der Nötigung beteiligt.“]
The District Court relied on the plaintiff’s submissions in the civil proceedings insofar as those had not been disputed by the defendants. With regard to the disputed facts, it relied on the findings of fact set out in the criminal judgment delivered by the Traunstein Regional Court. By indicating the corresponding pages of the criminal judgment, it referred to the submissions therein of the co-accused and the applicant’s wife and to the testimony of the plaintiff during the criminal proceedings. At the hearing in the criminal proceedings the co-accused had, inter alia, confirmed the applicant’s participation in the meeting (see paragraph 6 above), but they had been ambiguous regarding whether the applicant had known about the kidnapping beforehand, whereas the applicant’s wife had submitted that she and her husband had only learned about the circumstances of the plaintiff’s relocation on the occasion of the meeting. The plaintiff had also testified about the applicant’s role during the meeting (see paragraph 8 above) and had described in detail the circumstances of the kidnapping by two of the co-accused.
In its reasoning the District Court elaborated on the causal link between the incident and the damage. It calculated the amount of the compensation and explained why the co-accused could not set off possible claims from their failed investments against A’s compensation claim (Aufrechnung).
On 2 January 2012 the applicant, who was then represented by a lawyer, appealed. He argued in particular that the District Court had wrongly assumed that the criminal judgment had established his criminal liability for deprivation of liberty and coercion.
On 14 March 2012 the Frankenthal (Pfalz) Regional Court informed the applicant of its intention to reject the appeal without a hearing, pursuant to Article 522 § 2 of the Code of Civil Procedure (Zivilprozessordnung). Following a preliminary assessment, it found that the applicant’s appeal lacked any prospect of success because the District Court had lawfully established the applicant’s civil liability. It invited the applicant to submit written comments within two weeks. It remains unclear whether the applicant then sent further comments.
On 10 April 2012 the Regional Court, by a unanimous decision of three judges, rejected the appeal without having an oral hearing. It found that the appeal had no prospect of success, that the matter at issue was not of fundamental importance, and that it was not necessary to allow the appeal in order to ensure a consistent application of the law. It relied on the facts established by the first-instance District Court pursuant to Articles 314 and 529 § 1 of the Code of Civil Procedure. It declined to order any new factfinding measures because the applicant had failed to request rectification of the facts before the District Court pursuant to Article 320 of the Code of Civil Procedure.
On 11 July 2012 the Federal Constitutional Court declined to consider a constitutional complaint lodged by the applicant, without providing reasons (no. 1 BvR 1306/12).
Article 206a of the Code of Criminal Procedure contains rules on the termination of criminal proceedings. It reads, insofar as relevant, as follows:
“(1) Where a procedural impediment arises after the main proceedings have been opened, the court may terminate the proceedings by a court order made outside the main hearing.
...”
The relevant provisions of the Criminal Code read, insofar as relevant, as follows:
“(1) Whosoever imprisons a person or otherwise deprives him of his freedom shall be liable to a term of imprisonment not exceeding five years or a fine.
...”
“(1) Whosoever unlawfully with force or threat of serious harm coerces a person into carrying out, suffering or omitting to carry out an act shall be liable to imprisonment not exceeding three years or a fine.
(2) The act shall be unlawful if the use of force or the threat of harm is to be deemed reprehensible in relation to the aim pursued.
...”
Under German criminal law there are three basic conditions that must be met in order to establish criminal liability:
(1)  the accused has fulfilled the objective and subjective constitutive elements (Tatbestand) of a criminal offence:
(a)  objective constitutive element (objektiver Tatbestand): the accused has committed the proscribed act or omission which is contrary to a penal provision;
(b)  subjective constitutive element (subjektiver Tatbestand): the accused has acted with intent, unless the relevant penal provision requires only negligence;
(2)  there are no exonerating circumstances, e.g. self-defence (keine Rechtfertigungsgründe);
(3)  the offence has been committed with criminal guilt (Schuld), i.e. the accused was capable of appreciating the wrongfulness of an act and of acting in accordance with such appreciation, e.g. being of sound mind; If the accused considered wrongly the act or omission to be lawful, he acted with criminal guilt when he could have avoided such a misapprehension.
Only if all three elements are fulfilled, it is established that the person concerned is criminal liable.
Appeal proceedings are primarily devised as a means of checking and rectifying errors made by the courts of first instance. However, they do not allow a complete review of both facts and law. In particular, the appellate court has to base its decision on the facts established by the court of first instance. A prior rectification request can be lodged before the court of first instance in order to correct inaccuracies of facts in the judgment. The relevant provisions read as follows:
“The part of the judgment that addresses the facts of the case shall establish evidence of the submissions made by the parties in oral argument. Such evidence can be invalidated only by the record of the hearing.”
“(1) Should the part of the judgment addressing the facts of the case contain inaccuracies not governed by the provisions of the preceding Article, or omissions, obscure passages, or contradictions, their correction may be applied for within a period of two weeks by submitting a written pleading to this effect.
(2) ...
(3) The application shall be heard in oral argument, should one of the parties have lodged a corresponding application.
(4) The court shall rule without taking evidence. Solely those judges who contributed to the original judgment may contribute to the decision. ...
(5) Any correction of the part addressing the facts of the case shall not result in modifying the remainder of the judgment.”
 “(1) An appeal can only be lodged on the grounds that the decision is based on a violation of the law ... or that the facts which are relevant under Article 529 justify a different decision.
...”
“(1) The appellate court has to establish on its own motion whether the appeal is admissible and whether it has been lodged in accordance with the formalities and time-limits as prescribed by law. If any of these prerequisites is lacking, the appeal has to be rejected as being inadmissible. The decision is taken by court order, which is amenable to an appeal on points of law.
(2) The appellate court shall promptly reject the appeal by unanimous decision if it is convinced that
the appeal does not have any prospect of success,
the legal matter is not of fundamental importance and
the development of the law or the safeguarding of consistent jurisprudence does not require that a decision be given by the appellate court.
The appellate court or its presiding judge shall inform the parties of their intention to reject the appeal and the reasons therefor, and shall give the appellant the opportunity to submit observations within a set time-limit. A decision pursuant to the first sentence [of this paragraph] has to be reasoned, if the reasons for the rejection are not included in the letter of information pursuant to the second sentence.
(3) A decision given pursuant to the first sentence of paragraph (2) above is not amenable to appeal. “
“(1) The appellate court shall base its hearing and decision on:
the facts established by the first-instance court, unless there are concrete indications that raise doubts as to the correctness or completeness of the establishment of the relevant facts which warrant a fresh examination;
new facts, as long as it is admissible to consider these.
...”
Compensation claims in tort are governed by Article 823 of the Civil Code, which reads as follows:
“(1) Whosoever, intentionally or negligently, unlawfully harms the life, body, health, freedom, property or another right of another person, is liable to pay compensation to the other party for the damage caused.
(2) The same obligation is placed on anyone who breaches a statute that is intended to protect others ...”
For the purpose of Article 823 § 2 of the Civil Code, statutes designed for the protection of others are, for example, Articles 239 and 240 of the Criminal Code. Under the general principles on civil proceedings the injured party relying on Article 823 § 2 of the Civil Code must show in the first place that the defendant committed a wrongful act, that is, fulfilled the objective and subjective constitutive elements of a criminal offence. This does not include the finding of criminal guilt, which is not a constitutive element of a criminal offence according to German legal methodology (see paragraph 30 above). While fulfilling the objective and subjective constitutive elements of a criminal offence may be the basis for both criminal and civil liability, there are further steps in tort law to give rise to civil liability, which differ from the elements of a criminal offence. The injured party must additionally prove causation, damage and the amount of the financial loss in accordance with the principle of civil law. Finally, while similar exonerating circumstances may exclude both criminal and civil liability, the concepts of criminal guilt and civil fault are not only embedded in different laws, namely the Criminal and the Civil Code, but are also different.
While the degree of criminal guilt has a direct effect on the amount of the penalty or even excludes criminal liability, in tort law it is decisive whether the accused had acted with or without civil fault. While the punishment in criminal law is measured on a basis of the degree of criminal guilt (schuldangemessene Strafe), in tort law the full loss is always to be compensated when civil fault has been established (see Hellwege, P. & Wittig, P. (2015), “Delictual and criminal liability in Germany”, Chapter 4, in M. Dyson (Ed.), “Comparing Tort and Crime: Learning from across and within Legal Systems”, p. 155).
In exceptional cases a defendant without civil fault can still be liable when equity requires compensation (ibid., Chapter 4, p. 158). With regard to procedural law, unlike in criminal law, the civil courts cannot carry out investigations of their own motion (Amtsermittlungsgrundsatz), but generally have to rely on the facts and evidence presented by the parties. Rules on the burden of proof apply in the event of doubt, but there is no general rule that any reasonable doubt must benefit the defendant (in dubio pro reo), as in criminal law. Moreover, while the criminal court has to establish the accused’s guilt beyond doubt, in tort law the defendant has to prove the reasons which would exonerate him from civil liability, in particular also that he acted without civil fault (ibid., Chapter 4, pp. 163/164).