The case concerns disciplinary proceedings against the applicant for allegedly improperly carrying out her duties as a senior prosecutor in a highprofile criminal case involving sexual abuse of a minor. The applicant complained that those proceedings had not been fair because of a parallel parliamentary inquiry, prejudicial statements made in the media by highranking politicians, and the heightened media attention to the case.
The applicant was born in 1965 and lives in Skriaudžiai, in the Prienai Region. She was represented by Ms A. Ručienė, a lawyer practising in Kaunas.
The Government were represented by their Agent, Ms K. BubnytėŠirmenė.
The domestic proceedings giving rise to the present application stemmed from the same facts as those described in Stankūnaitė v. Lithuania (no. 67068/11, §§ 7-9, 18-29 and 109, 29 October 2019).
In November 2008 D.K. submitted a complaint to the Kaunas police, alleging that his daughter, who was a minor, had been sexually abused by several individuals in the presence of her mother, L.S. On 30 November 2008 the police opened a pre-trial investigation.
In December 2008 and January 2009 the investigation was carried out by the police and supervised by G.R., a prosecutor of the Kaunas City District Prosecutor’s Office (hereinafter “the KCDPO”).
On 29 December 2008 A.Ū., the girl’s godfather and a former adviser to the Speaker of the Seimas (the Lithuanian Parliament), was served with an official notice that he was suspected of sexual abuse of a minor.
In January 2009 the Kaunas Regional Prosecutor’s Office carried out a review of the conduct of the investigation by the police. It identified certain shortcomings and held that, in view of the complexity of the case, the investigation should be taken over by the KCDPO and entrusted to a qualified prosecutor.
The Chief Prosecutor of the KCDPO instructed the applicant, who was the Deputy Chief Prosecutor, to entrust (pavesti) the investigation to the prosecutor G.R. The applicant did so. From 30 January until 11 June 2009 the investigation was carried out by G.R. and supervised by the applicant.
In January and February 2009 the suspect, A.Ū., submitted several requests to the prosecutor, including a request to grant him access to the investigation file. G.R. dismissed his requests. A.Ū. complained about that decision to the senior prosecutor – the applicant. On 9 February 2009 the applicant allowed A.Ū.’s complaint in part and granted him access to the material of the investigation file which had been collected until that date, with the exception of documents and video recordings containing interviews with the minor.
In June 2009, after carrying out a review of the conduct of the investigation by the KCDPO and identifying certain shortcomings, the Kaunas Regional Prosecutor’s Office decided to take over the investigation.
In August 2009 the Prosecutor General’s Office decided that the investigation should be taken over by the Vilnius Regional Prosecutor’s Office, in view of the fact that D.K. had family ties to some law enforcement officers working in Kaunas.
Throughout the investigation D.K. lodged numerous requests with the authorities to question various individuals whom he suspected of having sexually abused his daughter, and on several occasions he provided new details of the alleged abuse which he claimed that his daughter had remembered. On an unspecified date D.K. sent to the media and other individuals filmed recordings of his daughter recounting the sexual acts allegedly performed against her.
In October 2009 two individuals who had been accused by D.K. of having sexually abused his daughter were fatally shot in Kaunas. One of them was L.S.’s sister and the other was a judge of the Kaunas Regional Court. D.K. was suspected of murdering them; he fled from the authorities, and a search warrant was issued against him. In April 2010 D.K. was found dead (ibid., § 16).
In June 2010 A.Ū. was found dead and the criminal proceedings against him were discontinued. They were subsequently reopened at the request of A.Ū.’s relatives, who sought to clear his name, and he was acquitted posthumously (ibid., §§ 26-28).
On 6 October 2009 the Prosecutor General’s Office began an inquiry into how the pre-trial investigation concerning D.K.’s complaints had been conducted by all the authorities involved (see paragraphs 6, 8, 11 and 12 above). The inquiry was entrusted to a commission composed of prosecutors. It was instructed to assess, inter alia, the quality, intensity and thoroughness of the investigation; whether all relevant investigative methods had been used; whether the investigation had been supervised in a qualified and responsible manner; whether the complaints received during the investigation had been dealt with properly; and whether decisions related to children’s rights and the protection of minors had been appropriate and justified.
On 12 October 2009 the commission concluded the inquiry and issued its findings, identifying multiple shortcomings at all stages of the pre-trial investigation.
The inquiry found that, after opening the investigation, the police had failed to act promptly and thoroughly, and the prosecutor G.R. had failed to properly supervise it. In particular, the interviews with D.K. and his daughter had been superficial and had not clarified the essential circumstances of the alleged criminal activity; the alleged location of the crime had been examined too late and the examination had not been thorough; the minor’s clothes had not been seized; the suspect’s home had not been searched; and the secret surveillance of electronic communications had been ordered too late. That had led to the loss of potentially essential evidence, and establishing the truth had become especially difficult.
In the view of the commission of inquiry, G.R.’s failure to properly supervise the work of the police and to address its multiple shortcomings gave reason to question her competence as a prosecutor. However, after the investigation had been taken over by the KCDPO, the Deputy Chief Prosecutor (the applicant) had entrusted it to G.R. (see paragraph 9 above), despite the order of the Kaunas Regional Prosecutor’s Office to entrust the investigation to a qualified prosecutor (see paragraph 8 above). There was no information to suggest that either the applicant or the Chief Prosecutor of the KCDPO had supervised the conduct of the investigation by G.R. or had given her any instructions.
It was also found that, after G.R. had dismissed A.Ū.’s request to be granted access to the investigation file (see paragraph 10 above), an appeal against that decision should have been lodged with the pre-trial investigation judge but not with the senior prosecutor (see paragraph 80 below). Therefore, by examining that complaint, the applicant had not acted in compliance with the law (see paragraph 10 above). In addition, by granting the suspect access to part of the investigation file, the applicant had not followed the relevant recommendations of the Prosecutor General which established the grounds for refusal of such access (see paragraph 81 below). The inquiry considered that the applicant had not properly assessed the situation.
Lastly, the inquiry found that various prosecutors of the Kaunas Regional Prosecutor’s Office and the Vilnius Regional Prosecutor’s Office had failed to prepare a strategy for conducting the investigation, to coordinate their actions with other institutions, and to promptly address the complaints and requests lodged by the parties to the proceedings.
Following the findings of the inquiry, the Prosecutor General’s Office opened disciplinary proceedings against several prosecutors, including the applicant.
On 13 October 2009 the Prosecutor General’s Office informed the applicant that disciplinary proceedings had been opened against her because there were grounds to believe that she had committed disciplinary offences. In particular, she had put G.R., who had previously failed to properly supervise the pre-trial investigation, in charge of conducting that investigation; she had not supervised G.R.’s work and had not given her any instructions in writing; she had not taken adequate measures to ensure that the investigation was thorough and prompt; and she had unlawfully and unfoundedly granted the suspect access to the investigation file (see paragraphs 19 and 20 above).
On 22 October 2009 the Prosecutor General’s Office concluded the disciplinary proceedings against the applicant and several other prosecutors. It found that the applicant had put G.R. in charge of carrying out the investigation despite the grounds for calling her competence into question (see paragraph 19 above), and by doing so had disregarded the order of the Kaunas Regional Prosecutor’s Office to entrust the investigation to a qualified prosecutor (see paragraph 8 above). Furthermore, the applicant had not fulfilled her duties as a senior prosecutor: she had failed to properly supervise G.R.’s actions when conducting the investigation, to take note of the mistakes made by G.R. and to give her instructions in order to rectify them (see paragraphs 78 and 79 below). As a result, many of the shortcomings which had occurred at the hands of the police had not been eliminated after the transfer of the investigation to the KCDPO. Moreover, by examining the suspect’s complaint against G.R.’s decision to refuse him access to the investigation file, the applicant had overstepped her remit (see paragraph 20 above). It was concluded that the applicant had committed disciplinary offences and had thereby caused harm to the reputation of the prosecutor’s office and breached public trust in prosecutors. It was recommended to issue her with the disciplinary penalty of demotion.
It was also recommended to dismiss G.R. and to give other prosecutors various disciplinary penalties ranging from a warning to demotion.
On 30 October 2009 the Prosecutor General ordered the applicant’s demotion. On 3 November 2009 she was transferred to the post of prosecutor in the KCDPO.
In October 2009 the Parliamentary Committee on Legal Affairs (“the Committee”) asked the Prosecutor General’s Office to inform it what investigative measures had been taken during the pre-trial investigation into D.K.’s complaints, and what had been done to address the shortcomings of that investigation which had been identified.
On 22 October 2009 the Seimas ordered the Committee to carry out a parliamentary inquiry (see paragraphs 87 and 88 below) and to examine the following:
“1.  Whether the investigation into D.K.’s complaints was carried out in accordance with the requirements established by law;
Whether the aforementioned investigation was unjustifiably protracted;
What actions should be taken by State institutions to ensure that pre-trial investigations are conducted more expeditiously and efficiently, [and] what are the related legislative gaps.”
The Committee held several interviews with the Prosecutor General and examined the following documents: the findings of the disciplinary proceedings held by the Prosecutor General’s Office (see paragraphs 24 and 25 above); a report of another parliamentary committee on the functioning of child protection authorities; comparative reports on the conduct of pre-trial investigations and the legal status of prosecutors in other European countries; and the 2008 annual report on prosecutors’ activities in Lithuania.
As submitted by the Government, the Committee’s meetings were not public because the inquiry was related to the ongoing pre-trial investigation.
On 21 January 2010 the Committee issued its report. It first examined the investigative measures which had been taken by the Kaunas police, and found them to be inadequate. The Committee stated:
“The findings of the disciplinary proceedings carried out by the Prosecutor General’s Office ... likewise established major shortcomings in the pre-trial investigation and its insufficient prosecutorial supervision. The commission which had conducted the disciplinary inquiry found that the persons responsible for the said inaction were the prosecutor of the KCDPO who had initially supervised the pre-trial investigation and had later taken over its conduct, and the Deputy Chief Prosecutor of the KCDPO.”
The Committee also examined the conduct of the investigation by the KCDPO and held, inter alia, that the KCDPO “had obviously procrastinated in the investigation, because it had carried out almost no new investigative measures but had only repeated those which had been carried out previously and which had provided practically no new information of evidential value”. The Committee concluded that the KCDPO had carried out the investigation incompetently and not in accordance with the relevant legal requirements. It also found that the relevant department of the Prosecutor General’s Office had failed to properly supervise the KCDPO. The Committee noted that the Prosecutor General’s Office had also identified multiple shortcomings in the KCDPO’s actions and that the latter “had found that the persons responsible for the said inaction [had been] the prosecutor of the KCDPO who had initially supervised the pre-trial investigation and had later taken over its conduct, and the Deputy Chief Prosecutor of the KCDPO”.
The Committee similarly held that the Kaunas Regional Prosecutor’s Office had failed to fulfil its duties properly and that the Prosecutor General’s Office had failed to properly supervise it.
The Committee furthermore examined the legal status of the prosecutors and the legal instruments regulating pre-trial investigations. It identified some structural problems, presented an overview of comparative law material, and concluded that certain legislative amendments might be necessary.
The concluding part of the Committee’s report, in so far as relevant, read as follows:
Conclusions
“1.  The pre-trial investigation concerning D.K.’s complaint and subsequent requests was conducted by the [Kaunas police] dismissively, not expeditiously, and incompetently.
The KCDPO, which supervised the investigation, did not take measures to speed it up, and did not carry out all available procedural and operative actions to find and establish evidence or to influence the [Kaunas police] in order to eliminate the obstacles to a proper investigation.
At the KCDPO the investigation was also carried out incompetently and not in compliance with the requirement of the Code of Criminal Procedure ... to complete a pre-trial investigation within the shortest possible time, and the Kaunas Regional Prosecutor’s Office failed to properly supervise ... compliance with that requirement. After taking over the investigation, the KCDPO obviously procrastinated because it practically did not undertake any new procedural measures which were essential at that time ...
Neither the Kaunas Regional Prosecutor’s Office ... nor the Prosecutor General’s Office examined who had been responsible for the shortcomings of the investigation carried out by the KCDPO; they did not determine the appropriate disciplinary penalties for the officers responsible or the structural measures necessary to ensure that pre-trial investigations at the KCDPO were carried out and supervised expeditiously and professionally.
...”
Recommendations
“...
The Prosecutor General should assess, in a principled manner, the actions of all the officers who carried out the pre-trial investigation and who supervised the prosecutors.
...”
The Committee’s report also contained a number of conclusions and recommendations relating to general measures to be taken in order to improve the functioning of prosecutors’ offices and child protection authorities.
On the same day the Seimas adopted a resolution: (1) to endorse the conclusions of the Committee (see paragraphs 31-35 above); (2) to find that the Prosecutor General had failed to properly organise the work of the institutions under his command and to properly fulfil his duties established by law; and (3) to find that the prosecutors of the Prosecutor General’s Office, the KCDPO and the Kaunas Regional Prosecutor’s Office who had conducted and supervised the pre-trial investigation had failed to properly carry out their functions established by law.
In February 2010 the Prosecutor General resigned from office.
The case concerning the allegations of sexual abuse brought by D.K., as well as the subsequent murders and the deaths of D.K. and A.Ū. (see paragraphs 14 and 15 above) attracted considerable attention from the public, politicians and the media (ibid., § 109).
On 7 October 2009 the newspaper Respublika published an article quoting a Member of Parliament who stated that “the deliberate inaction of the authorities may have driven [D.K.] to such a tragedy”. The publication also quoted the Chair of the Parliamentary Committee on Legal Affairs, who stated that the pre-trial investigation concerning D.K.’s complaints had been carried out “rather dismissively and slowly” (skundo tyrimas buvo atliekamas gana atmestinai ir lėtai).
In an article published on 8 October 2009 one of the largest national newspapers, Lietuvos rytas, stated that the Parliamentary Committee on Legal Affairs had asked the Prosecutor General to provide answers to a list of questions concerning the investigation of the “paedophilia scandal” (see paragraph 27 above). It quoted the Chair of that Committee, who had said that he had seen “displays of procrastination and negligence” in the actions of investigating officers (teigė pareigūnų veiksmuose matąs vilkinimo ir aplaidumo apraiškų).
On 12 October 2009 the following statement was published on the President’s official website:
The President demands personal accountability of the officers who possibly protracted the investigation concerning the alleged sexual abuse of a minor
“The President of the Republic of Lithuania, Dalia Grybauskaitė, received the Prosecutor General ... [who] presented to the President a summary of the investigation concerning the tragic events in Kaunas.
According to the President, it is evident that the investigation concerning the alleged sexual abuse of a minor was protracted. Therefore, the officials who acted negligently must be immediately identified and they must be personally held to account.
As stated by the President, not a single officer or institution found responsible for the unjustified protraction of the investigation can avoid accountability. The Prosecutor General has been instructed to promptly identify the individuals who protracted the investigation, and the reasons for this, and to ensure an efficient further investigation of the events in Kaunas, in order to determine the truth as soon as possible.”
On 19 October 2009 a statement on the President’s official website gave an account of another meeting between the President and the Prosecutor General, in which the latter had informed the President about the progress of the ongoing disciplinary inquiry (see paragraph 22 above). The President stated that it was essential to promptly identify the officers who had failed to perform their duties diligently, and to demand that they be personally held to account.
On 23 October 2009 one of the largest national news websites, Delfi.lt, reported on the conclusions of the disciplinary proceedings conducted by the Prosecutor General’s Office (see paragraphs 24 and 25 above).
On 26 October 2009 Delfi.lt published an article that included the following statement from the President:
Grybauskaitė: I expect harsher decisions concerning prosecutors
“President Dalia Grybauskaitė admits that she was expecting harsher decisions concerning the prosecutors implicated in relation to the professional misconduct identified in the course of the investigation into the paedophilia case involving D.K.’s daughter. When asked how she viewed the proposal to dismiss one prosecutor and to demote others, the Head of State said that she had expected a different decision. ‘Tomorrow, I think, perhaps the decisions will be different ... As for the Kaunas prosecutors, I expect slightly different – harsher – decisions’, D. Grybauskaitė told journalists ...
On Friday, in connection with the professional misconduct identified in the course of the investigation into the paedophilia case involving D.K.’s daughter, it was proposed that the Prosecutor General should dismiss prosecutor [G.R.] of the KCDPO and impose more lenient penalties on the other four Kaunas prosecutors ... It is proposed that [the applicant], the Deputy Chief Prosecutor of the KCDPO, be demoted ...”
On 12 November 2009 Lietuvos rytas published an article entitled “Sluggish investigators are partly responsible for the murders”. It reported on a meeting of the Parliamentary Committee on Legal Affairs, which had concluded that the pre-trial investigation concerning D.K.’s complaints had not been carried out diligently. The publication quoted the Chair of the Committee, who reiterated that the Prosecutor General should “assess, in a principled manner, the actions of the officers at all levels – investigators and supervisors alike”.
On 2 March 2010 Delfi.lt, the website of Lietuvos rytas and the news website Balsas.lt all published similar articles relating to the applicant. They quoted the Head of the Human Resources Division of the Prosecutor General’s Office, who stated that the applicant’s decision to grant A.Ū. access to the investigation file (see paragraph 10 above) had been one of the reasons for her demotion. It was also stated that the applicant had entrusted the pre-trial investigation to an unqualified prosecutor, G.R., and had failed to properly supervise her. According to the Head of the Human Resources Division, the applicant had claimed that she had put G.R. in charge of the investigation because the latter had the most work experience, but in fact G.R. had not had any experience in similar cases. The publications indicated that the applicant had appealed against her demotion before a court.
On 20 November 2009 the applicant lodged a complaint with the Vilnius Regional Administrative Court against the decision of the Prosecutor General’s Office to give her a disciplinary penalty (see paragraph 26 above). She argued that she had acted in accordance with all the legal instruments regulating the duties of a prosecutor, but that even if she had committed any offences, the penalty (demotion) was disproportionately harsh.
The applicant’s complaint was examined by a panel of three judges. The Government submitted that, according to the procedural rules valid at the material time, disputes related to disciplinary penalties could be examined at first instance by a single judge, but the applicant’s case had been assigned to a three-judge panel as an additional guarantee of fairness.
One of the judges assigned to the applicant’s case withdrew from it, on the grounds that the judge’s husband worked at an institution which had examined some of the circumstances of the criminal case brought by D.K.
The court held hearings in March 2010. At the request of both the applicant and the Prosecutor General’s Office, the hearings were closed to the public.
The applicant complained to the court that the record of one of the hearings had been inaccurate, and submitted her corrections. The court refused to include them in the case file, finding that the record had accurately described the parties’ submissions at the hearing and that the applicant had not indicated any significant mistakes.
On 15 May 2010 the applicant submitted a revised complaint in which she additionally argued that the decision to demote her had not been based on her performance but that it had been influenced by public statements made by politicians, who had insisted on strict punishments for investigating officers, as well as by the media coverage of the case – she referred to the publications quoted in paragraphs 39, 40 and 45 above.
Subsequently the applicant asked the court to include in the case file video recordings of certain television broadcasts which had discussed the proceedings in her case. It appears that the request was refused.
On an unspecified date the applicant asked for one of the judges to be removed from the case, on the grounds that that judge had refused her requests and that his questions during the hearing had demonstrated his bias against her. The court refused her request, finding that there were no statutory grounds to remove the judge.
On 7 June 2010 the Vilnius Regional Administrative Court dismissed the applicant’s complaint.
It annulled some of the findings of the inquiry conducted by the Prosecutor General’s Office. First, the court held that the applicant had not been responsible for entrusting the pre-trial investigation to G.R. because that decision had been taken by the Chief Prosecutor of the KCDPO and that the applicant had merely complied with his order (see paragraph 9 above). Secondly, the fact that the applicant had not given G.R. instructions in writing did not constitute a disciplinary offence because instructions could also be given orally (see paragraph 79 below).
However, the court upheld the conclusion that the applicant had failed to properly supervise the investigation carried out by G.R. and to ensure that essential investigative measures were taken promptly. It found that when the investigation was transferred to the KCDPO (see paragraph 8 above), the Kaunas Regional Prosecutor’s Office had indicated concrete investigative actions which had to be taken and had formulated specific questions which had to be addressed during the investigation. However, the majority of those instructions had not been carried out by the KCDPO, and the applicant had been unable to provide an explanation. The court therefore concluded that she had failed to fulfil the statutory duties of a supervising prosecutor (see paragraphs 78 and 79 below).
The court also held that the applicant had overstepped her remit by allowing the suspect to access the investigation file (see paragraph 24 above). Although the applicant argued that, being the senior prosecutor, she had had the right to examine appeals against decisions taken by G.R., the court found that this argument had no basis in law, and that the applicant’s position demonstrated that she had acted intentionally.
Furthermore, the court considered that the disciplinary penalty given to the applicant had not been too harsh. It observed that the applicant had held the position of senior prosecutor and that she had been responsible for supervising other prosecutors and ensuring that they complied with the law. However, she had breached the law herself and had failed to properly carry out her supervisory duties. It was therefore justified to demote her to a post which did not require her to supervise other prosecutors.
The court did not comment on the applicant’s complaint concerning the public statements made by politicians and the media coverage (see paragraph 52 above).
The applicant appealed against the above decision to the Supreme Administrative Court. Among other things, she submitted that the lower court had not addressed her complaint concerning the political and media interference in the case (see paragraphs 52 and 60 above). She also submitted that that court had been biased and that it had formed a preconceived opinion of the case because of various statements made in the media.
The Prosecutor General’s Office, in its reply to the applicant’s appeal, argued that courts did not have the authority to examine whether politicians had interfered with the Prosecutor General’s decisions.
The case was assigned to a panel of three judges. In March 2011 the applicant submitted a request for those three judges to be removed from the case, on the grounds that they had previously decided on her request for interim measures. The court allowed the applicant’s request and changed the composition of the panel.
In June 2011 two judges of the new panel withdrew from the case, on the grounds that they both had close family relationships with persons working in prosecutors’ offices and that this could cast doubt on their impartiality.
On 10 October 2011 the Supreme Administrative Court dismissed the applicant’s appeal and upheld the lower court’s decision in its entirety.
In particular, it observed that the Chief Prosecutor of the KCDPO had ordered the applicant to assist (padėti) G.R. in conducting the pre-trial investigation (see paragraph 9 above). In the light of that order and the specific instructions given to the KCDPO by the Kaunas Regional Prosecutor’s Office (see paragraph 57 above), the court considered that it had been the applicant’s duty to take all available measures in order to fulfil those instructions. However, as found by the lower court, she had failed to properly supervise G.R. and to ensure that the essential investigative measures were taken promptly.
The Supreme Administrative Court also stated that, in accordance with the law, the choice of an individual disciplinary penalty fell within the discretion of the prosecutor making that decision. This meant that the prosecutor’s decision could be annulled by a court only when the chosen penalty was manifestly disproportionate and did not correspond to the offence committed. In the court’s view, it was important to take into account the fact that the applicant had been one of the heads of the KCDPO and that this had increased her responsibility. The court considered that the penalty – demotion – was proportionate to the disciplinary offences committed by the applicant.
The court did not comment on the applicant’s complaints concerning the public statements made by politicians, the media coverage and the alleged bias of the first-instance court (see paragraph 61 above).
In January 2012 the applicant lodged an application for the reopening of the proceedings, arguing that the Supreme Administrative Court had incorrectly interpreted her duties as senior prosecutor. In particular, she submitted that the order given to her by the Chief Prosecutor of the KCDPO had been “to entrust” the investigation to G.R., but not “to assist” G.R. in carrying out the investigation (see paragraphs 9 and 65 above).
In July 2012 the Supreme Administrative Court refused to reopen the proceedings, finding that the applicant had not demonstrated that the courts had committed a material breach of the law.
In December 2012, after taking part in a selection procedure, the applicant took up office as a prosecutor at the Kaunas Regional Prosecutor’s Office.
After being dismissed from office (see paragraph 25 above), G.R. complained to the courts, and in December 2014 the Supreme Administrative Court allowed her complaint. It acknowledged that G.R. had committed disciplinary offences, but considered dismissal to be a disproportionate penalty. In the court’s view, that penalty had been determined essentially on the basis of the sole fact that the offences had been committed in a high-profile criminal case. However, G.R. had not acted intentionally, and the offences had been committed partly because of her insufficient qualification, high workload, and refusal of some of the parties to the proceedings to cooperate with the authorities. The court also considered it necessary to take into account G.R.’s positive character references, long work experience, and lack of previous disciplinary penalties. It changed the penalty from dismissal to a reprimand and ordered the reinstatement of G.R. to her previous post.
In March 2015 the applicant lodged a new application for the reopening of the proceedings concerning her demotion. She submitted that the courts in the proceedings instituted by G.R. had changed the case-law relating to the assessment of disciplinary offences committed by prosecutors and the determination of the appropriate penalties (see paragraph 72 above). The applicant argued that this constituted grounds to reopen her case, which had concerned the same legal provisions and closely related factual circumstances. She also submitted that the reopening of the proceedings would provide the courts with an opportunity to address the possible influence on the proceedings of public statements made by politicians and public officials, in accordance with the case-law of the European Court of Human Rights.
In May 2015 the Supreme Administrative Court refused to reopen the proceedings. It noted, inter alia, that the applicant and G.R. had held different posts and carried out different functions, concluding that this justified assessing their responsibility differently.
The relevant provisions of the Constitution of the Republic of Lithuania read:
Article 109
“In the Republic of Lithuania, justice shall be administered only by courts.
When administering justice, judges and courts shall be independent.
When considering cases, judges shall obey only the law.
...”
Article 114
“Interference by any institutions of State power and governance, Members of the Seimas or other officials, political parties, political or public organisations, or citizens with the activities of a judge or court shall be prohibited and shall incur liability as provided for by law.
...”
Article 7 §§ 1, 2 and 4 of the Law on Administrative Procedure establishes that when administering justice, judges and courts are independent and obey only the law. They examine administrative cases on the basis of the law, and under conditions which do not enable any external influence on them. Interference with the activities of judges and courts by State institutions, the Seimas and its members, or any other individuals or entities is not allowed and incurs liability under the law. Should such interference occur, the judge or court must respond in accordance with the law.
Article 2 of the Code of Criminal Procedure states that prosecutors and pre-trial investigation authorities must, in each case where there are indications that a criminal activity may have been committed, take all the actions provided for by law which are within their remit in order to complete the investigation within the shortest possible time and to shed light on the criminal activity.
Article 170 §§ 1 and 2 of the Code of Criminal Procedure provides that the prosecutor has the right to conduct a pre-trial investigation or to carry out separate investigative actions. When the investigation or separate investigative actions are carried out by a pre-trial investigation officer, the prosecutor must supervise the investigation.
The Recommendations on the actions of a prosecutor when organising and supervising a pre-trial investigation, approved by the Prosecutor General’s order no. I-86 of 19 June 2008 and valid at the material time, provided that the chief prosecutor or the deputy chief prosecutor of a given prosecutor’s office were responsible for the supervision of the pre-trial investigation carried out by a prosecutor of that office (point 15). A prosecutor could give instructions orally or in writing (point 25).
Article 63 § 1 of the Code of Criminal Procedure provides that procedural decisions taken by a prosecutor during a pre-trial investigation can be appealed against before a senior prosecutor. However, in line with Article 181 § 1 of that Code, a prosecutor’s refusal to grant access to the investigation file has to be appealed against before a pre-trial investigation judge.
The Recommendations on granting access to the pre-trial investigation file to the parties to the proceedings, approved by the Prosecutor General’s order no. I-58 of 18 April 2003 and valid at the material time, provided that when deciding whether to grant such access, the prosecutor had to assess whether it might interfere with the success of the investigation (point 13). Access to the investigation file could be denied, inter alia, where the essential data of the investigation had not been established; material objects had not been examined; there was a risk that material objects could be damaged or lost; or the investigation concerned allegations of sexual offences (point 14).
Article 118 of the Constitution provides that when performing their duties, prosecutors must be independent and obey only the law. The Prosecutor General is appointed and dismissed by the President upon the assent of the Seimas.
At the material time, Article 4 §§ 1, 2 and 5 of the Law on the Prosecution Service provided that the Prosecutor General was the head of prosecution service and was accountable to the President and to the Seimas. The Seimas established the priorities for the activities of prosecutors’ offices and ensured their parliamentary supervision. The Prosecutor General had the duty to inform the Government and the public about the activities of prosecutors’ offices.
At the material time, Article 4 § 3 of the Law on the Prosecution Service provided that procedural activities of prosecutors were supervised by senior prosecutors and by courts, who had the authority to establish procedural violations and to annul unlawful decisions.
At the material time, Article 40 of the Law on the Prosecution Service established the following disciplinary penalties: (1) warning; (2) reprimand; (3) relegation to a lower qualification rank; (4) demotion; and (5) dismissal.
At the material time, the Regulations on the conduct of disciplinary inquiries and application of disciplinary penalties to prosecutors, approved by the Prosecutor General’s order no. I-9 of 30 January 2007, provided that when choosing a disciplinary penalty, the following criteria had to be taken into account: the nature of the disciplinary offence committed, the reasons for its commission, the type of misconduct, the consequences of the offence, and other relevant circumstances (point 6.2).
At the material time, Article 49 § 9 of the Statute of the Seimas provided that parliamentary committees had, among others, the following powers: (1) when performing parliamentary supervision, to hear information and reports by ministries and other State institutions on the compliance with laws and other legal instruments; and (2) on their own initiative or at the request of the Seimas, to carry out parliamentary inquiries into specific problems and to provide their conclusions to the Seimas.
At the material time, Article 56 § 4 of the Statute of the Seimas provided that when carrying out parliamentary inquiries at the request of the Seimas, parliamentary committees acted in accordance with Articles 75 and 76 of the Statute, which regulated ad hoc parliamentary commissions of inquiry and control, and they had the same powers as those commissions (see paragraph 89 below).
Article 75 § 3 of the Statute of the Seimas provides that the powers of ad hoc parliamentary commissions of inquiry and control are established by law. Article 3 § 2 of the Law on Ad Hoc Parliamentary Commissions of Inquiry and Control states that when investigating issues assigned to them and in the exercise of their powers, the said commissions may not interfere with the activities of courts, judges, prosecutors and pre-trial investigation officers, in relation to the conduct of a pre-trial investigation or judicial examination of a case.
In its ruling of 4 April 2006 the Constitutional Court held as follows:
“In a democratic State governed by the rule of law, Parliament – the representation of the Nation – cannot be denied the power to take measures, inter alia ... to receive information about various processes taking place in the State and society, about the situation in various areas of life and the problems arising. Otherwise Parliament ... would be unable to properly discharge its functions and adopt the necessary decisions ...
In accordance with the constitutional principle of the separation of powers, and other relevant provisions of the Constitution, it must be concluded that the Seimas does not have the power to create such ad hoc commissions of inquiry which, in the course of their investigation, would interfere with the powers of other institutions. For example, an ad hoc parliamentary commission of inquiry may not take over the constitutional powers of courts or otherwise interfere with the implementation of their constitutional remit, or undermine the independence of judges and courts in the course of the administration of justice, let alone administer justice by itself ...
However, [the aforementioned limitations] do not mean that ad hoc parliamentary commissions of inquiry may not have any powers whatsoever with respect to State or municipal institutions, their officials and other persons. Such powers may be established by law, in compliance with the Constitution.”
At its 98th plenary session, held on 21-22 March 2014, the European Commission for Democracy through Law (Venice Commission) adopted the Amicus Curiae brief in the case of Rywin v. Poland (nos. 6091/06, 4047/07 and 4070/07), which at that time was pending before the European Court of Human Rights. Its relevant parts read:
“7.  Parliamentary committees of inquiry are an instrument for what is usually referred to as the ‘control’, ‘supervisory’ or ‘oversight’ function of parliament, the essence of which is to oversee and scrutinise the work of the executive branch. The main purpose of this supervision is to ensure democratic political accountability and to improve the transparency and efficiency of the government and the administration. But the supervisory function may also provide parliament with information of relevance to its own legislative and budgetary procedures.
...
Parliamentary committees of inquiry conduct processes that are essentially of a political nature and which should not be confused with criminal investigations and proceedings. Such committees should not assess or pronounce themselves on the question of criminal responsibility of the persons covered by the inquiry, which should be for the public prosecutor and the courts alone to assess.
At the same time, it is in the nature of (alleged) political ‘scandals’ that they may give rise to parallel processes, so that a case which is under parliamentary inquiry may at the same time be subject both to administrative inquiries and to legal investigations or proceedings. There is in itself nothing unusual or illegitimate in this. But it does put extra responsibility on all parties involved to ensure that proper distance is kept between the parliamentary (political) inquiry and the criminal investigations and legal proceedings before the courts ...
... For such procedures to unduly interfere with the rights protected under Article 6 [of the European Convention on Human Rights] they would have to interfere with and in some way unduly influence the proceedings before the courts ... which can only be assessed on the basis of the individual case at hand.
...
A basic premise for the Venice Commission is that parliaments as autonomous institutions distinct from the judiciary cannot be impeded from carrying out their own inquiries. The composition of a parliamentary committee is always the result of a political choice. Its mandate is meant to be temporary. Even when they look into the possibly criminally relevant conduct of individual persons, parliamentary committees of inquiry conduct processes that are essentially of a political nature, and which should not be confused with criminal investigations and proceedings. The result of these activities does not alter the legal order. The report which closes its work is in itself only an incentive to parliamentary discussion. The ultimate aim of the committees’ investigations is transparency with a view of ensuring that the public is informed of matters which affect the res publica (the public good).
... Searching for offences cannot be the only goal of the inquiry conducted by a parliamentary committee, or even the main purpose of its creation. This would be unconstitutional, even if domestic law provides no sanction. Indeed, the means conferred to the committee must always serve the jurisdiction of the parliament in a system of separation of powers – either to establish the responsibility of government and ministers or to collect information necessary for more effective legislation or to present political recommendations to government.
Even if identical items may be subject to both criminal proceedings and a parliamentary inquiry, the aim should always be different. The criminal investigation should lead to an individual legal measure, the conviction or acquittal of the accused. The committee of inquiry has no power over individuals, except to call them to testify.”
To my regret, I cannot agree with the position of the majority in this case regarding the lack of reasoning of the administrative courts in respect of the alleged political and media pressure in the domestic proceedings conducted against the applicant (see paragraphs 140–44 of the judgment).
Both in her action before the first-instance court and in her appeal before the Supreme Administrative Court, the applicant raised the argument that the fairness of the proceedings had been prejudiced by public statements of politicians and by media reporting. The Court acknowledges that the domestic courts failed to address this argument in an explicit manner (paragraphs 142 and 144 of the judgment). In my opinion, this is an understatement, allowing an outside observer to assume that at least an implicit answer was provided. However, I believe it is fair to say that the courts of the respondent State failed to address the applicant’s argument in any way at all.
While the majority find the lack of an (explicit) answer to the applicant’s complaint to be disconcerting (paragraph 142 of the judgment), they nevertheless do not consider that this particular omission would suffice for a violation of Article 6 § 1 of the Convention to be found. In their view, the following grounds speak for such a position:
(a)  the domestic courts addressed the applicant’s main arguments;
(b)  the applicant formulated her complaint before the domestic courts in a rather general way;
(c)  the domestic courts provided detailed reasons to justify the decision to give her a disciplinary penalty;
(d)  the Court has concluded that the independence and impartiality of the administrative courts were not compromised by public statements of State officials and politicians;
(e)  the failure of the domestic courts to explicitly address the applicant’s argument did not render the proceedings, taken as a whole, unfair.
I disagree with this view for the reasons stated below.
The applicant’s argument, as formulated both before the Vilnius Regional Administrative Court and the Supreme Administrative Court, was clearly articulated and supported by evidence that she considered to substantiate her claim (see paragraphs 52 and 61 of the judgment in connection with paragraphs 38, 39 and 44). She expressly claimed that the decision to demote her had been influenced by public statements made by the politicians. She referred to the specific content of those statements and submitted examples. Her submissions were clear enough for both domestic courts to understand the essence of, and the grounds for, her complaint, which in turn put those courts under an obligation to consider it properly. In the light of the majority’s argument outlined above in point (b), it is difficult to discern from their reasoning what more the applicant should have brought before the domestic courts in order to trigger the obligation for those courts to reply. Equally, it should not be overlooked that the applicant repeated her complaint before the Court, which in turn has not found it to be insufficiently substantiated for an examination on the merits. Instead, it has rightly declared the complaint admissible and has explicitly examined it on nine pages. I believe that the same requirement should be found to apply domestically.
Furthermore, and regarding the majority’s argument under (a), I believe that a failure to address one of the relevant legal and/or factual arguments by a party to the proceedings cannot be remedied by properly examining the other complaints. This is all the more true when the complaints and arguments are not directly interconnected. A complaint that public statements by high-ranking politicians were incompatible with the notion of an independent and impartial tribunal within the meaning of Article 6 § 1 of the Convention is a self-standing complaint (see, for example, Sovtransavto Holding v. Ukraine, no. 48553/99, 25 July 2002, and Kinský v. the Czech Republic, no. 42856/06, 9 February 2012). Even if it appears that procedural steps in a given case were duly taken and that the outcome of the proceedings cannot be reproached as such, public statements may, in view of their content and the manner in which they were made, entail a violation of the above-mentioned Convention provision. For this reason, any such complaint cannot be considered as “lateral” (as opposed to “main complaint”, in the language of the majority) and should properly be addressed by a court before which it is brought.
Equally, and in respect of the majority’s argument under (c) above, the fact that in a sufficiently reasoned view of the domestic courts, the outcome of the proceedings (namely the applicant’s demotion) was justified, cannot remedy the fact that those courts failed to address the applicant’s argument about the alleged political and media pressure in her case. What is at stake is not actual proof of pressure or of its influence upon the decision taken, but the appearance of impartiality (see, mutatis mutandis, Kinský, cited above, § 98). Thus an outcome may be perfectly correct, but a violation can still be indicated, if the relevant conditions are met. They are of course to be thoroughly examined, an exercise which the Court has performed in this judgment, whilst the domestic courts failed to do the same.
Similarly, while I agree with the majority that the independence and impartiality of the domestic courts were not prejudiced by the public statements made by the politicians and the media in the applicant’s case, I believe that this fact did not absolve those courts from addressing the applicant’s complaint to that effect. To hold otherwise would mean that the domestic courts are under an obligation to respond only to those arguments of a party which are well-founded, a position that would be wholly unacceptable from the point of view of protection against arbitrariness, which is at the heart of the concept of fairness, as embodied by Article 6 of the Convention. According to the Court’s case-law, the domestic courts are under an obligation to deal with those arguments which, if upheld, would be decisive for the outcome of the case (see Ruiz Torija v. Spain, 9 December 1994, Series A no. 303A). As the applicant’s argument, if successful, could have changed the course of the case domestically, I unfortunately cannot subscribe to the majority’s argument outlined above under (d).
Finally, the argument of the majority that the omission of the Lithuanian administrative courts did not render the proceedings as a whole unfair (see under (e) above) is in my opinion inconsistent with the well-established approach of the Court. Notably, a single failure to comply with the obligation of domestic courts to provide reasons for dismissing a relevant submission of a party has sufficed for the Court to find a violation of Article 6 § 1 of the Convention (see, in the context of failure to provide reasons for not referring a case to the CJEU for a preliminary ruling, Schipani and Others v. Italy, no. 38369/09, 21 July 2015, and Baltic Master Ltd. v. Lithuania [Committee], no. 55092/16, 16 April 2019). Introducing a requirement that the fairness of the proceedings as a whole be tested in order to establish a violation goes beyond existing case-law and I therefore find it hard to support this position.
The omission of both the Vilnius Regional Administrative Court and of the Supreme Administrative Court is all the more serious as the applicant’s complaint did not pertain (only) to relevant issues of fact or domestic law, but (also) to alleged political and media pressure in her case which, if confirmed, would entail a self-standing violation of Article 6 § 1 of the Convention.
In sum, I believe that the repeated failure of the respondent State’s domestic courts to address a relevant and substantiated argument submitted by the applicant was incompatible with the prohibition of arbitrariness and therefore constituted a violation of Article 6 § 1 of the Convention.