The case was referred to the Court by the European Commission of Human Rights (“the Commission”) on 22 January 1997, within the three-month period laid down by Article 32 § 1 and Article 47 of the Convention. It originated in an application (no. 23413/94) against the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland lodged with the Commission under Article 25 by Ms L.C.B., a British national, on 21 April 1993.
The Commission’s request referred to Articles 44 and 48 and to the declaration whereby the United Kingdom recognised the compulsory jurisdiction of the Court (Article 46). The object of the request was to obtain a decision as to whether the facts of the case disclosed a breach by the respondent State of its obligations under Articles 2 and 3 of the Convention.

2.  In response to the enquiry made in accordance with Rule 33 § 3 (d) of Rules of Court A, the applicant stated that she wished to take part in the proceedings and designated the lawyer who would represent her (Rule 30). On 27 February 1997 the President of the Court, Mr R. Ryssdal, authorised this lawyer to represent the applicant despite the fact that he was not resident in one of the Contracting States (Rule 30 § 1), and also granted her request to be known by the initials L.C.B. for the purposes of the proceedings before the Court.
The Chamber to be constituted included ex officio Sir John Freeland, the elected judge of British nationality (Article 43 of the Convention), and the President of the Court (Rule 21 § 4 (b)). On 21 February 1997, in the presence of the Registrar, the President drew by lot the names of the other seven members, namely Mr F. Gölcüklü, Mr F. Matscher, Mr B. Walsh, Mr I. Foighel, Mr B. Repik, Mr K. Jungwiert and Mr J. Casadevall (Article 43 in fine of the Convention and Rule 21 § 5).
As President of the Chamber (Rule 21 § 6), Mr Ryssdal, acting through the Registrar, consulted the Agent of the United Kingdom Government (“the Government”), the applicant’s lawyer and the Delegate of the Commission on the organisation of the proceedings (Rules 37 § 1 and 38). Pursuant to the order made in consequence on 25 March 1997, the Registrar received the applicant’s and the Government’s memorials on 2 October 1997.
On 31 October 1997, the President granted the applicant leave to submit further written observations (Rule 37 § 1 in fine), which were received by the Registrar on 18 November 1997.
On 21 November 1997, Mr R. Bernhardt, Vice-President of the Court, replaced, as President of the Chamber, Mr Ryssdal, who was unable to take part in the further consideration of the case (Rule 21 § 5).
In accordance with the President’s decision, the hearing took place in public in the Human Rights Building, Strasbourg, on 26 November 1997. The Court had held a preparatory meeting beforehand.
There appeared before the Court:
The Court heard addresses by Mrs Liddy, Mr Anderson and Mr Eadie.
On 2 December 1997 the Chamber granted the Government leave to submit further written observations (Rule 37 § 1 in fine). These were received by the Registrar on 30 January 1998. The applicant’s submissions in reply were received on 9 March 1998.
Subsequently, Mr M.A. Lopes Rocha, substitute judge, replaced as a full member of the Chamber Mr Walsh, who had died (Rule 22 § 1).
Between 1952 and 1967 the United Kingdom carried out a number of atmospheric tests of nuclear weapons in the Pacific Ocean and at Maralinga, Australia, involving over 20,000 servicemen. Among these tests were the “Grapple Y” and “Grapple Z” series of six detonations at Christmas Island in the Pacific Ocean (November 1957–September 1958) of weapons many times more powerful than those discharged at Hiroshima and Nagasaki.
During the Christmas Island tests, service personnel were ordered to line up in the open and to face away from the explosions with their eyes closed and covered until twenty seconds after the blast.
The applicant alleged that the purpose of this procedure was deliberately to expose servicemen to radiation for experimental purposes. The Government denied this and stated that it was believed at the time of the tests, and was the case, that personnel were sufficiently far from the centre of the detonations to avoid being exposed to radiation at any harmful level 
and that the purpose of the line-up procedure was to ensure that they avoided eye damage and other physical injury caused by material blown about by the blast.
While the applicant’s father was serving as a catering assistant in the Royal Air Force, he was present at Christmas Island during four nuclear tests in 1957 and 1958. He also participated in the clean-up programme following the tests.
The applicant was born in 1966. In or about 1970 she was diagnosed as having leukaemia, a cancerous disease of the organs which manufacture blood. Her records of admission to hospital state, under the heading “Summary of Possible Causative Factors”, “Father – Radiation exposure”.
The applicant received chemotherapy treatment which lasted until she was 10 years old. Because of her illness and associated treatment she missed half of her primary school education and was unable to participate in sports or other normal childhood activities.
In December 1992 the applicant became aware of the contents of a report prepared by the British Nuclear Tests Veterans’ Association (“BNTVA”) indicating a high incidence of cancers including leukaemia in the children of Christmas Island veterans. The applicant is a member of the BNTVA.
She still has regular medical check-ups and is afraid to have children of her own in case they are born with a genetic predisposition to leukaemia.
In 1983 an Independent Advisory Group, chaired by Sir Douglas Black, was set up in the United Kingdom to investigate reports of an abnormally high number of children contracting leukaemia in the area around the nuclear power reactor at Sellafield (formerly called Windscale) in northern England. The Group confirmed that childhood leukaemia was more common in this area than normal, but was not able to determine the reason for this. One of the members of the Group, Dr Martin Gardner, went on to conduct three studies into the phenomenon. The third, published on 17 February 1990 (“the Gardner Report”), found a statistical association
Following the publication of this report, two cases were brought against the authority responsible for the Sellafield reactor by plaintiffs who had contracted leukaemia and non-Hodgkin’s lymphoma respectively, claiming that their fathers’ employment at Sellafield had caused their illnesses. The two cases were heard concurrently in the High Court of Justice, London, on ninety days between October 1992 and June 1993. Over thirty expert witnesses gave oral evidence before the court and approximately one hundred written reports were submitted, primarily directed at the question whether the statistical association found by Dr Gardner could be relied upon and was directly causal, as claimed by the plaintiffs.
Judgment was given by Mr Justice French on 8 October 1993.
He found, inter alia, that the Gardner Report was “a good study, well carried out and presented”. However, certain technical criticisms which had been made of it were valid so as to diminish confidence in its conclusions and underline the need to seek confirmation from other independent studies before relying on it. He did, however, find that the evidence bore out a strong prima facie association between paternal preconceptional irradiation and childhood leukaemia in Seascale, although considerable reserve was necessary before it could be concluded that there was a causal link.
Although the judge was content to assume that there was a heritable component to the plaintiffs’ diseases, he considered that this was very small. He placed particular reliance on studies of the children of survivors of the Nagasaki and Hiroshima bombings, which did not show any significant increase in leukaemia or non-Hodgkin’s lymphoma, and were therefore quite inconsistent with the Gardner hypothesis. One of the defendant’s witnesses, Sir Richard Doll, had referred to research emphasising the role of infection in causing childhood leukaemia, particularly in areas where unusual population mixing had occurred, as was the case in Seascale, which had a very mobile population of high socio-economic class situated in a remote rural area. The judge found that a theory of causation based on such factors, combined with chance, was no less plausible than the Gardner hypothesis.

In conclusion, he held that, “on the evidence before me, the scales tilt decisively in favour of the defendants, and the plaintiffs, therefore, have failed to satisfy me on the balance of probabilities that paternal preconceptional radiation was a material contributory cause of the Seascale excess or, it must follow, of [their diseases]” (Reay v. British Nuclear Fuels PLC; Hope v. British Nuclear Fuels PLC [1994] 5 Medical Law Reports 155; and see also ‘Childhood leukaemia and Sellafield: the legal cases’, Journal of Radiological Protection, vol. 14, no. 4, pp. 293–316).
On 14 January 1966 the United Kingdom lodged with the Secretary General of the Council of Europe the following declaration:
“… in accordance with the provisions of Article 25 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms, signed at Rome on the 4th of November 1950, … the Government of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland recognise, in respect of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland only …, for the period beginning on the 14th of January 1966, and ending on the 13th of January 1969, the competence of the European Commission of Human Rights to receive petitions submitted to the Secretary General of the Council of Europe, subsequently to the 13th of January 1966, by any person, non-governmental organisation or group of individuals claiming, in relation to any act or decision occurring or any facts or events arising subsequently to the 13th of January 1966, to be the victim of a violation of the rights set forth in that Convention and in the Protocol thereto…”
A declaration under Article 46 of the Convention, recognising the Court’s jurisdiction subject to similar conditions, was filed on the same day. Both declarations have been renewed on several occasions subsequently.
In her application to the Commission (no. 23413/94) of 21 April 1993, the applicant complained under Articles 2 and 3 of the Convention that she had not been warned of the effects of her father’s alleged exposure to radiation, which prevented pre- and post-natal monitoring that would have led to earlier diagnosis and treatment of her illness. In addition, she claimed to have been subjected to harassment and surveillance, in breach of Article 8.

22.  On 28 November 1995 the Commission declared the application admissible in so far as it related to the complaints under Articles 2 and 3 about failure to advise and inform the applicant’s parents about her father’s alleged exposure to radiation. In its report of 26 November 1996, (Article 31), it expressed the unanimous opinion that there had been no violations of Articles 2 and 3. The full text of the Commission’s opinion and of the concurring opinion contained in the report is reproduced as an annex to this judgment.
The Government, in their written and oral pleadings, asked the Court to find no violation of the Convention.
The applicant asked the Court to find violations of Articles 2, 3, 8 and 13 of the Convention, and to award her damages under Article 50.