The case was referred to the Court by the European Commission of Human Rights (“the Commission”) on 10 July 1997, within the three-month period laid down by Article 32 § 1 and Article 47 of the Convention. It originated in an application (no. 19601/92) against the Republic of Turkey lodged with the Commission under Article 25 by a Turkish national, Mr Cengiz Çıraklar, on 28 November 1991.
The Commission’s request referred to Articles 44 and 48 and to the declaration whereby Turkey recognised the compulsory jurisdiction of the Court (Article 46). The object of the request was to obtain a decision as to whether the facts of the case disclosed a breach by the respondent State of its obligations under Article 6 § 1 of the Convention.
In response to the enquiry made in accordance with Rule 33 § 3 (d) of Rules of Court A, the applicant stated that he wished to take part in the proceedings and designated Ms S. Bilge Uslu, of the İzmir Bar, to represent him (Rule 30).
The Chamber to be constituted included ex officio Mr F. Gölcüklü, the elected judge of Turkish nationality (Article 43 of the Convention), and Mr R. Ryssdal, the President of the Court (Rule 21 § 4 (b)). On 27 August 1997, in the presence of the Registrar, the President drew by lot the names of the other seven members, namely Mr Thór Vilhjálmsson, Mr B. Walsh, Mr C. Russo, Mr N. Valticos, Mr J. Makarczyk, Mr V. Butkevych and Mr V. Toumanov (Article 43 in fine of the Convention and Rule 21 § 5). Subsequently Mr Ryssdal, who had died on 18 February 1998, was replaced as President of the Chamber by Mr R. Bernhardt, the Vice-President of the Court (Rule 21 § 6, second sub-paragraph); and Mr Walsh, who died on 9 March 1998, was replaced by Mr Pantiru, substitute judge (Rule 22 § 1). Later Mr Bernhardt, who was unable to take part in the further consideration of the case, was replaced as President of the Chamber by Mr Thór Vilhjálmsson (Rule 21 § 6, second sub-paragraph) and as a member of the Chamber by Mr M.A. Lopes Rocha, substitute judge (Rule 22 § 1).
As President of the Chamber (Rule 21 § 6), Mr Ryssdal, acting through the Registrar, had consulted the Agent of the Turkish Government (“the Government”), the applicant’s lawyer and the Delegate of the Commission, Mrs M. Hion, on the organisation of the proceedings (Rules 37 § 1 and 38). Pursuant to the order made in consequence, the Registrar received the applicant’s and the Government’s memorials on 30 April and 1 May 1998 respectively. On 19 June 1998 the Delegate of the Commission informed the Registrar that she had no observations to make.
Having regard to the views expressed by the applicant, the Government and the Delegate of the Commission, and having satisfied itself that the condition for derogating from its usual procedure had been met (Rules 26 and 38), the Chamber had decided to dispense with a hearing in the case and Mr Bernhardt had given the applicant and the Government leave to make observations on the content of each other’s memorials.
The Government’s and the applicant’s supplementary observations were received at the registry on 22 May and 2 June 1998 respectively.
The applicant, a Turkish national born in 1966, lives in İzmir (Turkey). At the material time he was a student at the University of the Aegean.
On 16 March 1990 a group of students held an unauthorised demonstration in front of the buildings of the University to commemorate the deaths in 1978 of seven students from Istanbul University and the deaths of Kurds in the north of Iraq in 1988. The police intervened, dispersed the crowd and arrested the applicant together with other demonstrators and took them into police custody.
After being questioned by the police, those arrested were brought before the prosecutor at the İzmir National Security Court, on 19 March 1990.
On 20 March 1990 Mr Çıraklar and his co-defendants appeared before the İzmir National Security Court. They were charged with taking part in an unauthorised demonstration, offering violent resistance to the police and disseminating separatist propaganda.
In a letter of 13 April 1990 the İzmir police chief informed the applicant’s father that his son had been arrested following the events at the University of the Aegean, taken into police custody, brought before the İzmir National Security Court and ordered to be detained pending trial at Buca Prison.
In the National Security Court the applicant contested the facts as submitted by the prosecution. He also alleged, on the basis of its composition, that the court was biased and argued that his arrest had been an infringement of his freedom of thought, expression and association.
Relying on the evidence of the policemen who had arrested the applicant, on photos published in a daily newspaper and on a video recording, the National Security Court found that the applicant had taken part in the demonstration in question, had resisted the police and had thrown stones at them. It also noted that the video recording showed that, before intervening and making arrests, the police had given the demonstrators a warning and had ordered them to disperse.
It held that the statements by Mr Çıraklar’s friends, according to whom he had been only a spectator, did not reflect the whole truth as those witnesses claimed to have seen the policemen arrest the applicant and his girlfriend, S.D., between 11.30 a.m. and 12 noon, whereas it had been established that the demonstration had not begun until about 12.15 p.m. The court also refused to hear S.D. as a witness for the defence on the ground that she was herself a defendant in the case.
In a judgment of 28 December 1990 the National Security Court, composed of two civilian judges and a military judge with the rank of colonel, found Mr Çıraklar guilty of having, contrary to Law no. 2911, taken part in a demonstration on a public highway without permission and used violence against the police, and it sentenced him to two years and six months’ imprisonment. Thirty of his co-defendants were convicted on the same counts.
On 15 February 1991 the applicant appealed on points of law against the judgment of 28 December 1990. In his pleading he challenged the version of the facts accepted by the National Security Court and the way in which it had assessed the evidence, and criticised the court’s legal classification of the offences. He also submitted that his conviction contravened Articles 9, 10 and 11 of the Convention.
In a judgment of 28 May 1991 the Court of Cassation upheld the judgment of the trial court.
The National Security Courts were created by Law no. 1773 of 11 July 1973, in accordance with Article 136 of the 1961 Constitution. That law was annulled by the Constitutional Court on 15 June 1976. The courts in question were later reintroduced into the Turkish judicial system by the 1982 Constitution. The relevant part of the statement of reasons contains the following passage:
“There may be acts affecting the existence and stability of a State such that when they are committed, special jurisdiction is required in order to give judgment expeditiously and appropriately. For such cases it is necessary to set up National Security Courts. According to a principle inherent in our Constitution, it is forbidden to create a special court to give judgment on a specific act after it has been committed. For that reason the National Security Courts have been provided for in our Constitution to try cases involving the above-mentioned offences. Given that the special provisions laying down their powers have thus been enacted in advance and that the courts have been created before the commission of any offence …, they may not be described as courts set up to deal with this or that offence after the commission of such an offence.”
The composition and functioning of the National Security Courts are subject to the following rules.
The constitutional provisions governing judicial organisation are worded as follows:
Article 138 §§ 1 and 2
“In the performance of their duties, judges shall be independent; they shall give judgment, according to their personal conviction, in accordance with the Constitution, statute and the law.
No organ, authority, … or … person may give orders or instructions to courts or judges in the exercise of their judicial powers, or send them circulars or make recommendations or suggestions to them.”
Article 139 § 1
“Judges … shall not be removed from office or compelled to retire without their consent before the age prescribed by the Constitution…”
Article 143 §§ 1–5
“National Security Courts shall be established to try offences against the Republic, whose constituent qualities are enunciated in the Constitution, against the territorial integrity of the State or the indivisible unity of the nation or against the free democratic system of government, and offences which directly affect the State’s internal or external security.
National Security Courts shall be composed of a president, two other regular members, two substitute members, a prosecutor and a sufficient number of assistant prosecutors.
The president, one of the regular members, one of the substitutes and the prosecutor shall be appointed from among judges and public prosecutors of the first rank, according to procedures laid down in special legislation; one regular member and one substitute shall be appointed from among military judges of the first rank and the assistant prosecutors from among public prosecutors and military judges.
Presidents, regular members and substitute members … of National Security Courts shall be appointed for a renewable period of four years.
Appeal against decisions of National Security Courts shall lie to the Court of Cassation.
...”
Article 145 § 4
“Military legal proceedings
The personal rights and obligations of military judges … shall be regulated by law in accordance with the principles of the independence of the courts, the safeguards enjoyed by the judiciary and the requirements of military service. Relations between military judges and the commanders under whom they serve in the performance of their non-judicial duties shall also be regulated by law…”
Based on Article 143 of the Constitution, the relevant provisions of Law no. 2845 on the National Security Courts provide as follows:
Section 1
“In the capitals of the provinces of … National Security Courts shall be established to try offences against the Republic, whose constituent qualities are enunciated in the Constitution, against the territorial integrity of the State or the indivisible unity of the nation or against the free democratic system of government, and offences which directly affect the State’s internal or external security.”
Section 3
“The National Security Courts shall be composed of a president, two other regular members and two substitute members.”
Section 5
“The president of a National Security Court, one of the [two] regular members and one of the [two] substitutes … shall be civilian … judges, the other members, whether regular or substitute, military judges of the first rank…”
Section 6(2), (3) and (6)
“The appointment of military judges to sit as regular members and substitutes shall be carried out according to the procedure laid down for that purpose in the Military Service Act.
Except as provided in the present Law or other legislation, the president and the regular or substitute members of the National Security Courts … may not be appointed to another post or place, without their consent, within four years…
…

If, after an investigation concerning the president or a regular or substitute member of a National Security Court conducted according to the legislation concerning them, competent committees or authorities decide to change the duty station of the person concerned, the duty station of that judge or his duties themselves … may be changed in accordance with the procedure laid down in that legislation.”
Section 27(1)
“The Court of Cassation shall hear appeals against the judgments of the National Security Courts.”
Section 34(1) and (2)
“The rules governing the rights and obligations of … military judges appointed to the National Security Courts and their supervision …, the institution of disciplinary proceedings against them, the imposition of disciplinary penalties on them and the investigation and prosecution of any offences they may commit in the performance of their duties … shall be as laid down in the relevant provisions of the laws governing their profession…
The observations of the Court of Cassation on military judges, the assessment reports on them drawn up by Ministry of Justice assessors … and the files on any investigations conducted in respect of them … shall be transmitted to the Ministry of Justice.”
Section 38
“A National Security Court may be transformed into a Martial-Law Court, under the conditions set forth below, where a state of emergency has been declared in all or part of the territory in respect of which the National Security Court concerned has jurisdiction, provided that within that territory there is more than one National Security Court…”
The relevant provisions of the Military Legal Service Act are worded as follows:
Additional section 7
“The aptitude of military judges … appointed as regular or substitute members of the National Security Courts that is required for promotion or advancement in salary step, rank or seniority shall be determined on the basis of assessment reports drawn up according to the procedure laid down below, subject to the provisions of the present Act and the Turkish Armed Forces Personnel Act (Law no. 926).

(a) The first superior competent to carry out assessment and draw up assessment reports for military judges, whether regular or substitute members … shall be the Minister of State in the Ministry of Defence, followed by the Minister of Defence.
…”
Additional section 8
“Members … of the National Security Courts belonging to the Military Legal Service … shall be appointed by a committee composed of the personnel director and the legal adviser of the General Staff, the personnel director and the legal adviser attached to the staff of the arm in which the person concerned is serving and the Director of Military Judicial Affairs at the Ministry of Defence…”
Section 16(1) and (3)
“Military judges … shall be appointed by a decree issued jointly by the Minister of Defence and the Prime Minister and submitted to the President of the Republic for approval, in accordance with the provisions on the appointment and transfer of members of the armed forces…
…
The procedure for appointment as a military judge shall take into account the opinion of the Court of Cassation, the reports by Ministry of Justice assessors and the assessment reports drawn up by the superiors…”
Section 18(1)
“The rules governing the salary scales, salary increases and various personal rights of military judges … shall be as laid down in the provisions relating to officers.”
Section 29
“The Minister of Defence may apply to military judges, after considering their defence submissions, the following disciplinary sanctions:
A warning, which consists in giving the person concerned notice in writing that he must exercise more care in the performance of his duties.
…
A reprimand, which consists in giving the person concerned notice in writing that a particular act or a particular attitude has been found to be blameworthy.
…
The said sanctions shall be final, mentioned in the assessment record of the person concerned and entered in his personal file…”
Section 38
“When military judges … sit in court they shall wear the special dress of their civilian counterparts…”
Article 112 of the Military Criminal Code of 22 May 1930 provides:
“It shall be an offence, punishable by up to five years’ imprisonment, to abuse one’s authority as a civil servant in order to influence the military courts.”
Under section 22 the First Division of the Supreme Military Administrative Court has jurisdiction to hear applications for judicial review and claims for damages based on disputes relating to the personal status of officers, particularly those concerning their professional advancement.
Mr Çıraklar applied to the Commission on 28 November 1991. He argued that in the absence of any reasonable suspicion of his having committed an offence, his arrest had not satisfied the requirements of Article 5 § 1 (c) of the Convention, and he said that he had suffered treatment contrary to Article 3 of the Convention while he was in police custody. He also complained, under Article 5 § 3, that he had not been brought “promptly” before a judge and, under Article 5 § 4, that he had not been able to take proceedings by which he could challenge the lawfulness of his police custody. He further alleged that, owing to the composition of the İzmir National Security Court, he had not had a hearing by an independent and impartial tribunal as required by Article 6 § 1. He considered, moreover, that there had been a breach of Article 6 § 2 and Article 8 on account of the fact that İzmir police headquarters had informed his father of his arrest and the reasons for it. He went on to submit that, contrary to Article 6 § 3 (c), he had not had a lawyer while in police custody and that the National Security Court’s refusal to hear certain witnesses had been contrary to Article 6 § 3 (d). Lastly, he alleged a violation of Articles 9, 10 and 11 due to his criminal conviction for having taken part in a demonstration whose purpose had been to protest against the repression of Iraq’s Kurdish population.
On 19 January 1995 the Commission declared the application (no. 19601/92) admissible as regards the impartiality and independence of the İzmir National Security Court and the fairness of the proceedings before that court. In its report of 20 May 1997 (Article 31), it considered those complaints jointly under Article 6 § 1 and expressed the opinion by thirty votes to one that there had been a violation of that provision. The full text of the Commission’s opinion and of the dissenting opinion contained in the report is reproduced as an annex to this judgment.
In his memorial the applicant requested the Court to hold that on account of its composition the İzmir National Security Court, which had heard his case, had not been an “independent and impartial tribunal” and that there had been a violation of Article 6 § 1 of the Convention as a consequence, and that the court’s refusal to hear his girlfriend as a defence witness had infringed Article 6 § 3 (d). He also submitted that there had been violations of Articles 3 and 5 of the Convention.
The Government asked the Court to find that the applicant had not exhausted domestic remedies and to hold that there had been no violation of the Convention.