The case originated in an application (no. 10551/10) against the Russian Federation lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Russian national, Mr Ramazan Rashitovich Zinatullin (“the applicant”), on 5 January 2010.
The applicant was represented initially by his mother Ms A.M. Zinatullina, and subsequently by Mr A.D. Begzi, a retired lawyer from Tolyatti who was granted leave by the President of the Section of the Court to represent the applicant. The Russian Government (“the Government”) were represented by Mr M. Galperin, Representative of the Russian Federation to the European Court of Human Rights.
The applicant, who had sustained serious injuries as a result of an accident in an unfinished building owned by the Tolyatti mayor’s office, complained that the authorities had refused to institute criminal proceedings against officials from the mayor’s office responsible for taking safety measures in respect of the unfinished building, and that the compensation awarded to him in civil proceedings had been inadequate.
On 8 September 2017 notice of the applicant’s complaints was given to the Government and the remainder of the application was declared inadmissible, pursuant to Rule 54 § 3 of the Rules of Court.
The applicant was born in 1993 and lives in Tolyatti, in the Samara region.
On 1 June 2008 the applicant was the victim of an accident at a construction site near his school in Tolyatti. He fell through a hole from the third to the second floor of an unfinished building onto a heap of broken bricks, thereby sustaining, among other damage, a serious craniocerebral injury resulting in a disability that will continue to require treatment.
On 11 June 2008 an investigator of the police department of the Avtozavodskoy district of Tolyatti declined to institute criminal proceedings into the accident, relying on a request lodged by the applicant’s mother on 9 June 2008 for an inquiry into the accident to be discontinued. She stated that the accident had happened because of her son’s own negligence, that she did not wish to have her son examined by forensic medical experts, and that she did not wish to lodge any claim. The investigator held that no crime had been committed against the applicant who had received injuries because of his own carelessness.
According to the applicant, it was only after he had undergone head and brain surgery and rehabilitation treatment and his mother’s recovery from an illness that she herself had been suffering that his mother was able to appeal, with the help of a lawyer, against the decision of 11 June 2008.
On 7 October 2008 a deputy prosecutor of the Avtozavodskoy district of Tolyatti annulled the decision of 11 June 2008.
In the course of a pre-investigation inquiry an investigator of the Avtozavodskoy district police department established that the construction site had not been entirely closed off and had been freely accessible from the side of the local school. The construction work – which had been commissioned by the Tolyatti town mayor’s office – had been on hold for lack of funding. The investigating authority found that there had been no elements of a crime in the actions of any officials from the mayor’s office and other organisations, and that the accident had happened as a result of the victim’s own negligence. It therefore declined, on 20 October 2008, to institute criminal proceedings in respect of the accident for absence of the occurrence of a crime.
The applicant’s mother lodged complaints about the refusal to institute criminal proceedings with various authorities, including the Samara regional prosecutor’s office, the Prosecutor General’s office of the Russian Federation and the Avtozavodskoy District Court of Tolyatti. She argued that the building had not been guarded and closed off, and that the mayor’s office had breached regulations for the “conservation” of unfinished buildings. At a hearing before the District Court prosecutor K. submitted that her complaint should be upheld. On 13 April 2009 the District Court upheld her complaint and declared the refusal of 20 October 2008 unlawful because it had not been established which organisation and specific officials had been responsible for the “conservation” of the unfinished building and why the elements of a crime had been missing in their actions. On 11 May 2009 the Avtozavodskoy district prosecutor’s office annulled the refusal of 20 October 2008 to institute criminal proceedings and ordered an additional preinvestigation inquiry. On 6 July 2009 an investigator from the investigative committee of Tolyatti attached to the Samara regional prosecutor’s office issued a similar refusal to institute criminal proceedings, stating that there was no causeand-effect connection between (i) the actions (or failure to act) on the part of officials from the mayor’s office and other organisations and (ii) damage to the applicant’s health arising from his own negligence and imprudence. Therefore an obligatory element of the crime under Article 293 of the Criminal Code of the Russian Federation (official negligence) was missing.
The applicant’s mother lodged a further complaint about the refusal to institute criminal proceedings, but to no avail. Initially lodged with the Civic Chamber of the Russian Federation, it was forwarded to the Children’s Rights Ombudsman at the President of the Russian Federation, who forwarded it to the Children’s Rights Ombudsman in the Samara region, who in turn forwarded it to the Samara regional prosecutor’s office, which informed her that the complaint would be examined by the Tolyatti prosecutor’s office (according to official letters to the applicant’s mother of 1 June, 8 June, 25 June and 7 July 2010, respectively). An article concerning the accident and the authorities’ refusal to institute criminal proceedings in respect of it was published in the local newspaper, Ploshchad Svobody.
The applicant, represented by his mother, brought a civil action for damages, seeking 1,000,000 roubles (RUB) by way of compensation for the nonpecuniary damage sustained by him. He argued that the unfinished building, which was situated near the school, in a residential area, had not been guarded and had been freely accessible.
On 14 October 2010 the Tsentralniy District Court of Tolyatti granted his action in part. It established that the accident had happened in an unfinished school building that had been the municipal property of the Tolyatti mayor’s office since 1997. The right of economic control (право хозяйственного ведения) of that building had been transferred to a municipal enterprise, Invest-Proyekt, in 2007 for the purposes of the completion of the construction work. No construction work had been carried out since the transfer of the unfinished building – the state of completion of which was assessed at 54% – to Invest-Proyekt. Nor had any construction work been undertaken earlier, from the time of the transfer of the unfinished building to the municipal property in 1997. The Tolyatti mayor’s office had denied any responsibility for the building and had argued at a hearing before the District Court that in the absence of ongoing construction work there had been no need for any protective measures. The District Court rejected those arguments, concluding that – under the Town Planning Code of the Russian Federation – during the period that the construction work had been on hold it had been the mayor’s office, as owner of the unfinished building, that had been responsible for taking all measures necessary to exclude threats to people’s life and health. However, as had been established by the wording of the decision of 6 July 2009 not to institute criminal proceedings, the construction site had not been entirely closed off and had been freely accessible from one side of the school. The building had had no windows or doors. The Tolyatti mayor’s office had failed to undertake, in line with the relevant regulations, any protection measures in respect of the unfinished building.
The Tsentralniy District Court of Tolyatti noted that the investigating authority’s finding regarding the lack of a causeandeffect connection between (i) the actions or (failure to act) on the part of officials from the mayor’s office and other organisations and (ii) the damage to the applicant’s health was relevant to its conclusion about the absence of the occurrence of a crime, but did not exclude civil-law responsibility. The District Court held that there had been a cause-and-effect connection between the failure of the mayor’s office’s to act – notably its failure to undertake measures to restrict access to the unfinished building – and the damage to the applicant’s health. While Invest-Proyekt had also been responsible for the accident in so far as it had failed to obtain the necessary permits for construction work, it had been the responsibility of the mayor’s office to exercise control over it, which it had not done. In so far as the mayor’s office blamed the previous owner (from which it had received the unfinished building in the state in which it had been at the time of the accident), the mayor’s office had been free to demand that the previous owner undertake protection measures for the “conservation” of the unfinished building, or to refuse to receive it without such measures being first put in place.
The court heard witnesses and established that after the accident the applicant had spent seventy days in a coma, with doctors estimating his chances of survival at 50%. He had been declared disabled and had been repeatedly hospitalised afterwards, and ongoing treatment and rehabilitation had been recommended. The court also took into account (i) the applicant’s own negligence – that is to say his entering a dangerous place and not exercising caution despite a warning from a friend about the hole in the floor, and (ii) the applicant’s mother’s failure to exercise parental responsibility – given that she should have exercised more control over her minor son’s activities, his visits to the construction site (of which she had been aware before the accident) and given her failure to prevent his visit to the construction site on the day of the accident (which had occurred at the weekend). The applicant argued that immediately before his fall he had been listening to music on headphones and had therefore not heard his friend’s warning about the hole in the floor.
The court also heard prosecutor F. who considered that the applicant’s claim should be granted in part. The court granted the applicant’s claim partially and ordered the Tolyatti mayor’s office, which it ruled bore the primary responsibility for the accident, to pay the applicant RUB 25,000 and Invest-Proyekt to pay him RUB 15,000 in respect of nonpecuniary damage.
The applicant’s mother appealed against that judgment, arguing that the amount of the compensation was inadequate. The mayor’s office also appealed against the judgment, which it considered unlawful. Prosecutor N. stated at a hearing before the Samara Regional Court that the judgment should be upheld. On 9 December 2010 the Samara Regional Court upheld the judgment on appeal. It agreed with the first-instance court that those responsible for providing compensation in respect of nonpecuniary damage were the mayor’s office, as the owner of an unfinished building that was a source of increased danger (источник повышенной опасности), and Invest-Proyekt, which had the right of economic control over the building. Their failure to act had led to the applicant suffering serious bodily harm and disability. The first-instance court had rightly ordered the mayor’s office, which had been responsible for exercising control over its property, to pay the larger part of the compensation. From the time of the transfer of the unfinished building to the municipal property in 1997 no construction work had been undertaken. Nevertheless, protection measures for the “conservation” of the unfinished building, such as fencing and guarding the unfinished building, had not been undertaken. Despite its close proximity to a school, the unfinished building had been freely accessible from the side of the school.
The judgment was enforced in the part concerning the payment by the mayor’s office. The remaining part has not been enforced owing to the fact that the municipal enterprise had gone into liquidation after the delivery of the judgment.
The applicant lodged an application for supervisory review of the judgments in the case. On 28 April 2011 a judge of the Supreme Court of the Russian Federation rejected his application, finding no grounds for supervisory review of the case by the Supreme Court.