The applicant complained under Article 6 §§ 1 and 3 (c) of the Convention that the domestic criminal proceedings against him had been unfair on account of the restriction of his right to a public hearing and his right to a defence through legal assistance of his own choosing.
The applicant was born in 1975 and lives in Baku. The applicant was represented by Mr U. Sommer, a lawyer practising in Germany.
The Government were represented by their Agent, Mr Ç. Əsgərov.
The facts of the case, as submitted by the parties, may be summarised as follows.
The applicant was arrested on 15 January 2007 on suspicion of participation in a criminal group. Following the arrest, he was apprised of his rights, including the right to have a lawyer of his own choosing or provided by the State, to remain silent and to refrain from making selfincriminatory statements. Immediately afterwards he was provided with a State-funded lawyer and a record to that effect was compiled by the investigator and signed by the latter, the applicant and his lawyer.
On 17 January 2007 the Sabail District Court ordered the applicant’s pre-trial detention.
According to the applicant, for approximately two weeks he was interrogated extensively, with the State-funded lawyer present. Despite being under considerable pressure from the investigating officers, he consistently denied all accusations against him. On an unspecified date about two weeks after his arrest, his family instructed a lawyer to take over his defence from the State-funded lawyer provided by the investigating authority. Subsequently, on an unspecified date in mid-May 2007, the applicant’s family instructed another lawyer, who replaced the previously instructed lawyer, and who represented him until delivery of the final decision in the domestic proceedings.
On 16 August 2007 the applicant was served with the indictment and the case was referred to the Assize Court for trial. The applicant was charged with offences under Articles 218.1 (establishing a criminal organisation), 278 (forceful acquisition or forceful possession of State power), 274 (treason), 28.2, 180.3.1 (intended robbery), 204.3.1, 204.3.2 (preparation, acquisition or sale of counterfeit money or securities), 228.1, 228.4 (illegal acquisition and possession of gas weapons and firearms), and 234.1 (illegal acquisition and possession of narcotics) of the Criminal Code. It was alleged that he had organised and then declared himself emir of a group that planned to spread ideas of Islamic fundamentalism and religious extremism, to forcefully gain power over the State and change the Constitution, along with the State and social systems, and to create a State governed by a religious leader in line with Islamic ideology and law. According to the indictment, members of the group had entered into negotiations with officers of the Guardians of the Iranian Islamic Revolution Corps on the territory of Iran, had accepted several payments in cash from Iranian secret service officers, and had planned attacks in Baku against citizens of the United States, the United Kingdom and Israel, as well as attacks on the Baku-Tbilisi-Ceyhan oil pipeline. With that purpose in mind, members of the group had undergone fitness and military training. Furthermore, in order to finance their operations, members of the group had planned robberies of persons and organisations and had smuggled 100,000 counterfeit United States dollars into the territory of Azerbaijan. The applicant was also allegedly in the illegal possession of weapons and narcotics. The applicant denied being guilty of the crimes he was charged with.
In the course of the proceedings before the Assize Court, the applicant claimed his innocence and stated that the organisation which he had established and headed had been created to promote Islamic unity and charity and did not have anti-constitutional aims. He admitted visiting Iran but denied meetings with the representatives of the Iranian secret service. The applicant also conceded that he had collected information concerning the Baku-Tbilisi-Ceyhan oil pipeline and the offices of western companies in Baku but explained this by his personal curiosity and commercial interests. The applicant further confirmed that the members of the organisation had undergone military training but justified that by their plans to establish a national paintball federation. He did not raise any complaint that he had been denied access to a lawyer of his own choosing and stated that he had not been subjected to undue pressure. However, the applicant complained that the narcotics and weapons had been planted in his car and home respectively.
According to the transcript of the hearing, a video-recording of the applicant’s interrogation was played during the trial, without any comments made on the part of the applicant.
On 10 December 2007 the Assize Court found the applicant and fourteen others guilty of all charges. The applicant was sentenced to fourteen years’ imprisonment.
The court based its judgment on the testimony of the applicant and his co-accused obtained during the trial. The court also relied on the following: the testimony of a number of witnesses; extensive records of intercepted SMS communications (where the applicant and a member of the group had discussed visits to Iran and their meetings with several Iranians); various planned criminal activities aimed at raising funds; covert videorecordings; and the conclusions of several forensic, ballistic, linguistic and other expert examinations.
According to the judgment of the Assize Court, proceedings before it were held in camera.
On 30 December 2007 the applicant lodged an appeal against the decision of the first-instance court. He complained that during his pre-trial detention he had been deprived of the right to be defended by a lawyer of his own choosing and that, despite his repeated objections, the proceedings had been held in camera.
On 25 February 2008 the Baku Court of Appeal dismissed the appeal and upheld the first-instance court’s judgment. The appellate court found the applicant’s complaints to be lacking any justification, as the Statefunded lawyer who had been provided immediately upon his arrest had been replaced by a lawyer of the applicant’s own choosing who had been instructed by his family as soon as the relevant request had been made. The appellate court also found that the first-instance court had correctly held the proceedings in camera, in accordance with the requirements of Article 6 of the Convention concerning issues of national security, in order to preserve information that constituted a State secret.
According to the judgment of the Baku Court of Appeal, proceedings before it were held in camera.
On 27 May 2008 the applicant lodged a cassation appeal, reiterating his previous complaints.
On 16 January 2009, at a hearing which was open to the public, the Supreme Court dismissed the cassation appeal, reiterating the Baku Court of Appeal’s reasoning.
The relevant provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure are described in detail in the Court’s judgment in Bibin and Others v. Azerbaijan ([Committee], nos. 81518/12 and 2 others, §§ 35-37, 30 January 2020).