The case was referred to the Court by the European Commission of Human Rights (“the Commission”) on 5 December 1996, within the three-month period laid down by Article 32 § 1 and Article 47 of the Convention. It originated in an application (no. 20458/92) against the Republic of Austria lodged with the Commission under Article 25 by an Austrian national, Mr Antun Petrovic, on 3 August 1992.
The Commission’s request referred to Articles 44 and 48 and to the declaration whereby Austria recognised the compulsory jurisdiction of the Court (Article 46). The object of the request was to obtain a decision as to whether the facts of the case disclosed a breach by the respondent State of its obligations under Article 14 taken together with Article 8 of the Convention.
In response to the enquiry made in accordance with Rule 35 §3 (d) of Rules of Court B, the applicant stated that he wished to take part in the proceedings and designated the lawyer who would represent him (Rule 31). The lawyer was given leave by the President to use the German language (Rule 28 § 3).
The Chamber to be constituted included ex officio Mr F. Matscher, the elected judge of Austrian nationality (Article 43 of the Convention), and Mr R. Bernhardt, the Vice-President of the Court (Rule 21 § 4 (b)). On 20 January 1997, in the presence of the Registrar, the President of the Court, Mr R. Ryssdal, drew by lot the names of the other seven members, namely Mr L.-E. Pettiti, Mr B. Walsh, Mr R. Macdonald, Sir John Freeland, Mr M.A. Lopes Rocha, Mr B. Repik and Mr J. Casadevall (Article 43 in fine of the Convention and Rule 21 § 5). Subsequently, Mr A. Spielmann, substitute judge, replaced Mr Macdonald, who was unable to take part in the further consideration of the case (Rules 22 § 1 and 24 § 1).
As President of the Chamber (Rule 21 § 6), Mr Bernhardt, acting through the Registrar, consulted the Agent of the Austrian Government (“the Government”), the applicant’s lawyer and the Delegate of the Commission on the organisation of the proceedings (Rules 39 § 1 and 40). Pursuant to the order made in consequence, the Registrar received the applicant’s memorial and the Government’s memorial on 20 and 21 August 1997 respectively.
On 19 September 1997 the Commission produced various documents from the proceedings before it, as requested by the Registrar on the President’s instructions.
In accordance with the President’s decision, the hearing took place in public in the Human Rights Building, Strasbourg, on 23 October 1997. The Court had held a preparatory meeting beforehand.
There appeared before the Court:
Mr Antun Petrovic, an Austrian national, was born in 1950 and lives in Vienna.
At the material time, he was a student and worked part time. His wife, who had already finished her university studies and was a civil servant in a federal ministry, gave birth on 27 February 1989. She carried on working while the applicant took parental leave to look after the child.
On 25 April 1989 Mr Petrovic claimed a parental leave allowance (Karenzurlaubsgeld).
On 26 May 1989 his claim was turned down by the local employment office (Arbeitsamt) on the ground that section 26(1) of the Unemployment Benefit Act 1977 (see paragraph 14 below) provided that only mothers could claim such an allowance when a child was born.
On 14 June 1989 the applicant appealed against that decision to the Vienna Regional Employment Office (Landesarbeitsamt). He contended that that provision of the Unemployment Benefit Act, under which men were not entitled to a parental leave allowance, was discriminatory and, therefore, unconstitutional.
On 4 July 1989 the Regional Employment Office dismissed the applicant’s appeal for the same reasons as the local employment office (see paragraph 9 above).
On 18 August 1989 Mr Petrovic lodged a complaint with the Constitutional Court (Verfassungsgerichtshof). He again argued that section 26(1) of the Unemployment Benefit Act was unconstitutional, as it was inconsistent with the principle of equality and Article 8 of the Convention.
On 12 December 1991, after considering the complaint in private, the Constitutional Court declined to accept it for adjudication on the ground that it did not have sufficient prospects of success.
Referring to its case-law, the Constitutional Court held that section 26(1) did not infringe the applicant’s constitutional rights and was not contrary to Article 8 or Article 12 of the Convention. It added that even if regard was had to recent statutory amendments (section 26 of the Unemployment Benefit Act had been amended by a federal law of 12 December 1989 – see paragraph 15 below), the applicant’s complaint was unfounded, seeing that the legislature had a certain amount of time in which to adapt new rules to changes in society (Anpassung gesetzlicher Vorschriften an geänderte Verhältnisse).
Under section 26(1) of the Unemployment Benefit Act 1977, mothers were entitled to a parental leave allowance provided that, following the birth of their child, they took up to one year’s parental leave and were eligible for maternity benefit (Wochengeld – a welfare allowance payable to working mothers for a period of eight weeks after the birth).
That section was amended by a federal law of 12 December 1989 (Official Gazette no. 651/1989), which came into force on 1 January 1990. It is now provided that a father may claim a parental leave allowance if he is in employment, has primary responsibility for looking after the child and the child lives under the same roof. In addition, the mother must either be entitled to parental leave as a result of the birth and have waived that right in whole or in part or, if not entitled to parental leave, be prevented by her work from looking after the child.
However, the new rules apply only in respect of children born after 31 December 1989 and therefore do not cover the applicant, whose child was born on 27 February 1989.
Mr Petrovic applied to the Commission on 3 August 1992. Relying on Article 8 of the Convention and on Article 14 taken together with Article 8, he complained of the refusal to grant him a parental leave allowance and of the discriminatory nature of that decision. He also alleged a breach of Article 13 of the Convention in that the Constitutional Court had refused to consider his appeal.
On 5 July 1995 the Commission declared the application (no. 20458/92) admissible as to the complaint concerning the allegedly discriminatory refusal to grant him a parental leave allowance, and inadmissible as to the remainder.
In its report of 15 October 1996 (Article 31), it expressed the opinion that there had been a violation of Article 14 taken together with Article 8 of the Convention (by twenty-five votes to five). The full text of the Commission’s opinion and of the three dissenting opinions contained in the report is reproduced as an annex to this judgment.
In their memorial the Government asked the Court to
“declare that Article 8 of the Convention is not applicable to the present case or, alternatively, to declare that Article 8 read in conjunction with Article 14 of the Convention was not violated”.
The applicant requested the Court to
“declare his application admissible, as the Commission has done, and to hold that in the instant case there has been a breach of Article 14 taken together with Article 8 [and] to award him just satisfaction in accordance with Article 50...”