The applicant complained under Article 6 § 1 of the Convention that the length of the criminal proceedings against her had been unreasonable. She also complained that her rights under Article 1 of Protocol No. 1 to the Convention had been breached on account of the forfeiture of her property within the criminal proceedings and her inability to get compensation for it after the charges against her had eventually been dropped for lack of evidence.
The applicant was born in 1968 and lives in Shepetivka. She was represented by Ms T.I. Gorbachevska, a lawyer practising in Kharkiv.
The Ukrainian Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Mr I. Lishchyna.
On 6 March 2000 the applicant and Ms S. signed a contract of sale, according to which the former bought from the latter 28% (about 280 sq. m) of a shop in Shepetivka for 14,146 Ukrainian hryvnias (UAH – at the time equivalent to about 2,600 euros (EUR)).
On 5 April 2002 the Shepetivka town prosecutor’s office (“the Shepetivka prosecutor’s office”) instituted criminal proceedings against the applicant’s uncle, Mr V., the Shepetivka mayor at the time, who was suspected of having extorted and having taken a bribe from Ms S.
On 14 May 2002 criminal proceedings were instituted against the applicant on suspicion of aiding and abetting bribe-taking on the part of Mr V. Specifically, it was suspected that the applicant had not paid anything to Ms S. for the 28% of the shop and that the title to that property had in reality been Ms S.’s bribe to the applicant’s uncle. The case was joined to that in respect of Mr V. (see paragraph 5 above).
From 16 to 20 May 2002 the applicant was held in pre-trial detention. Subsequently that preventive measure was replaced by an obligation not to leave her town of residence.
On 18 July 2002 the investigation was declared completed and the case was referred to the Slavuta Town Court (“the Slavuta Court”) for trial.
The trial court adjourned the proceedings several times, in particular, owing to the absence of witnesses.
On 17 July 2003 the Slavuta Court found the applicant (as well as Mr V.) guilty as charged. The applicant was sentenced to three years’ imprisonment suspended for two years, as well as confiscation of one quarter of her property. The trial court held that the 28% of the shop was to be considered as proceeds of crime and ordered its transfer to the State.
On 23 September 2003 the Khmelnytskyy Regional Court of Appeal (“the Court of Appeal”) upheld that judgment.
In January 2004 the State Bailiffs Service transferred the 28% of the shop to the Shepetivka Tax Inspectorate.
On 5 April 2004 the Shepetivka Tax Inspectorate sold that property at public auction to Mr S. (Ms S.’s husband) for UAH 144,600 (at the time equivalent to about EUR 22,000). Later, on 27 April 2007, Mr S. sold 24% of the shop to the Nadra Commercial Bank. The remaining 4% stayed in his possession.
On 16 September 2004 the Supreme Court quashed the lower courts’ decisions of 17 July and 23 September 2003 for “substantial breaches of the rules of criminal procedure”. More specifically, it noted that the reasoning provided by the first-instance court in the verdict did not comply with the legal requirements and that the appellate court had disregarded that. The Supreme Court observed that the accusation against the applicant was confined to the statement that she had aided and abetted bribe-taking on the part of Mr V., without any further details as to what that aiding and abetting had consisted of and in which circumstances it had taken place. Referring to the fact that the accusation against the applicant was “vague and imprecise”, the Supreme Court held that it was unable to verify the lawfulness of the lower courts’ decisions. It therefore remitted the case to the first-instance court for fresh examination.
On 24 July 2006 the Slavuta Court ordered an additional pre-trial investigation. On 27 December 2006 the Court of Appeal, however, quashed that ruling.
On 24 January 2007 the Slavuta Court received the case back for examination. It adjourned its hearings several times. Five such adjournments, accounting for about two months in total, were ordered because of the absence of both defendants.
On 1 October 2007 the Slavuta Court acquitted the applicant and her uncle.
However, on 6 August 2008 the Court of Appeal quashed that judgment and remitted the case to the first-instance court for fresh examination. It held, in particular, that a number of hearings had taken place in the absence of the prosecutor and the victim (Ms S.).
On 26 March 2009 the Slavuta Court ordered another round of pretrial investigation on the grounds that the accusation against the applicant and her uncle was vague and that the investigation carried out had been incomplete. The ruling listed a number of investigative measures to be carried out.
On 29 December 2009 the Shepetivka prosecutor’s office discontinued the criminal proceedings against the applicant and Mr V. for lack of evidence. By the same ruling it ordered that the forfeiture of their property be lifted.
On 6 December 2011 the Shepetivka Court quashed the abovementioned ruling following a complaint by Ms S. and ordered another pre-trial investigation. It noted that the prosecutor had failed to take all the investigative measures as directed by the Slavuta Court in its ruling of 26 March 2009 (see paragraph 19 above).
On 28 January 2012 the Shepetivka prosecutor’s office once again discontinued the criminal proceedings against the applicant and Mr V. for lack of evidence and lifted the forfeiture of their property.
On 21 February 2013 the applicant brought civil proceedings against the Khmelnytskyy regional prosecutor’s office (“the regional prosecutor’s office”), the Shepetivka Tax Inspectorate and the State Treasury seeking compensation in respect of pecuniary damage. Specifically, she requested compensation for the value of the forfeited 28% of the shop in the amount of UAH 1,661,649 (at the time equal to about EUR 154,000). The applicant relied on the forensic technical expert report of 11 July 2011, according to which that was the market value of the property in question (from which the value added by the repairs undertaken after the forfeiture of the premises had already been deducted).
On 17 June 2013 the Shepetivka Court allowed her claim in part and awarded her UAH 1,635,827 (about EUR 152,000) as compensation in respect of pecuniary damage to be paid by the State Treasury.
On 22 October 2013 the Court of Appeal quashed that judgment and rejected the applicant’s claim. It noted that, according to the Compensation Act, confiscated property (including real estate) was to be returned in natura or, where that was impossible, its value was to be compensated at the expense of the entity to which it had been transferred free of charge. According to the appellate court, the applicant did not show that she had tried to get back her property in natura before claiming compensation from the State.
The applicant appealed on points of law. She observed that the property in question had been forfeited in enforcement of a judicial decision, that the tax authority had sold it at public auction to a third person and that the revenue from that sale had been transferred to the State Treasury. Accordingly, the applicant maintained, it was for the State to compensate her for that property.
On 26 December 2013 the Higher Specialised Court for Civil and Criminal Matters (“the Higher Specialised Court”) upheld the appellate court’s findings and reasoning.
On 26 May 2014 the applicant, relying on the above-mentioned conclusions of the domestic courts, brought rei vindicatio proceedings against the new owner of the property in question, the Nadra Commercial Bank. She also listed as respondents the regional prosecutor’s office, the Shepetivka Tax Inspectorate and the State Treasury. The applicant indicated that she had no information about whether the bank was the only owner and asked the court to make the requisite enquiries.
On 27 October 2014 the Shepetivka Court rejected her claim. It observed that the bank had purchased the 24% of the shop, whereas the heirs of Mr S. (see paragraph 13 above; he had died in the meantime) had inherited its 4%, in compliance with law. Accordingly, even though the applicant was entitled to compensation for damage caused to her by the criminal proceedings against her, the court stated there were no grounds for retrieving the property from its bona fide acquirers. In sum, the Shepetivka Court concluded that the applicant had chosen an incorrect legal remedy for restoring her property rights.
On 21 January 2015 the Court of Appeal upheld the abovementioned decision. It noted that, according to the established procedure, the authority which had discontinued criminal proceedings was required to send a special notification to the person concerned with an explanation of when and where to seek compensation for damage caused. Where criminal proceedings were discontinued by a prosecutor’s office, the person had to apply to that office within six months of the notification with a view to determining the damage caused. The forfeited or confiscated property was to be returned to that person within a month, if the latter had claimed it within the above-mentioned six-month time-limit. The appellate court established that no such notification had ever been sent to the applicant. It criticised her, however, for not having followed the procedure outlined above.
On 22 July 2015 the Higher Specialised Court dismissed the applicant’s appeal on points of law. It noted that, as it had been established by the lower courts, her right to compensation for damage was undisputable. However, she had not respected the legally established procedure for seeking that compensation, and her claim could not therefore be allowed.
In September 2016 the applicant applied to the regional prosecutor’s office for evaluation of the damage caused to her.
On 20 November 2015 the prosecutor informed her that it was not within his competence to rule on such issues, and advised her to apply to the local “financial authority” for compensation for the full value of the property forfeited.
On 15 December 2015 the applicant applied to the Shepetivka Tax Inspectorate for either the return to her of the 28% of the shop in natura or for its value to be recompensed.
On 5 January 2016 the Shepetivka Tax Inspectorate replied that neither option was possible and rejected the applicant’s claims.
In June 2016 the applicant brought another claim against the Nadra Commercial Bank, the regional prosecutor’s office and the Slavuta United Tax Inspectorate (the legal successor to the Shepetivka Tax Inspectorate). She submitted that, as established by documents, the 28% of the shop which had been her private property had been transferred to the State. Subsequently, that property had been sold to Mr S. The applicant argued that, contrary to the applicable legislation, that contract of sale had not been certified by a notary and should therefore be considered as invalid. In other words, she maintained, the State had not lost its title to the property in question and nothing prevented it from returning that property to the applicant in natura.
On 22 November 2016 the Shepetivka Court dismissed her claim. It held that, contrary to the applicant’s argument, there had been no obligation to get the contract of sale in question certified by a notary.
On 28 March 2017 the Court of Appeal quashed that judgment and issued a new one, still dismissing the applicant’s claim, but on different grounds. It observed that the applicant had not been a party to the contract of sale, which she considered to be invalid. Accordingly, she could not claim the property from its bona fide acquirers. The appellate court observed that, according to the Compensation Act, confiscated property should be returned to its pre-confiscation owner in natura or, where that was impossible, its value should be compensated at the expense of the entity to which that property had been transferred free of charge. If property had been transferred to a different owner against payment and if the proceeds had gone to the State, the issue of compensation for its value to the preconfiscation owner was to be resolved by the State financial authority. It was established that Mr S. had paid for the 28% of the shop and that the money had gone to the State. The shop itself was no longer the property of the tax authorities and they could not therefore return it to the applicant as requested.
On 16 May 2017 the Higher Specialised Court started proceedings following an appeal on points of law by the applicant.
In April 2018 the case was transferred to the new Supreme Court, which took over the role of the Higher Specialised Court as a result of a large-scale judicial reform.
On 27 February 2019 the Civil Court of Cassation of the Supreme Court (“the Civil Court of Cassation”) relinquished the case to the Grand Chamber of the Supreme Court. It noted that the applicant had used all possible legal remedies to get her rights restored and that the repeated dismissals of her claims amounted to a denial of justice. Furthermore, it was observed that there seemed to be divergence in the Supreme Court’s case-law as regards the possibility of a third party to challenge a legal transaction. In sum, the relinquishment was explained by the fact that the problem revealed by the case at hand was purely of a legal nature and that its examination by the Grand Chamber of the Supreme Court was required to clarify and streamline domestic case-law.
On 19 March 2019 the Grand Chamber of the Supreme Court returned, however, the case to the Civil Court of Cassation for examination.
On 12 June 2019 the Civil Court of Cassation quashed the lower courts’ decisions of 22 November 2016 and 28 March 2017 (see paragraphs 37 and 38 above) and remitted the case to the first-instance court for a fresh examination. It held as follows:
“... the State has not complied with its legal obligation to return the claimant’s property to her. It has neither guaranteed such a return nor indicated any time-limits as to when this could happen. Accordingly, the only adequate legal remedy for the breach of the claimant’s rights is compensation for the damage suffered – namely, compensation for the property value from ... the State Treasury.”
The Civil Court of Cassation observed that the applicant had not indicated the State Treasury among the respondents. It noted, however, that her claim should not be rejected on those grounds and that it was for the courts to replace a wrong respondent with a proper one.
In the absence of any more factual updates from the parties, it appears that the proceedings are pending before the first-instance court.
Under Articles 81 and 324, the trial court was required to decide in a verdict what had to be done with the material evidence, including with proceeds of crime. Article 81 furthermore provided that proceeds of crime were liable to forfeiture, with a view to transfer to the State Treasury.
Under the provisions of this Act a person is entitled to compensation for damage caused by, in particular, unlawful advancement of criminal charges, unlawful property forfeiture and other procedural actions restricting his or her rights. The damage sustained must be compensated in full regardless of the guilt of officials of the bodies of inquiry, pre-trial investigation, prosecution and courts (section 1).
The right to such compensation arises, in particular, where criminal proceedings against a person are discontinued for a lack of evidence of his or her involvement in the crime (section 2).
If the above-mentioned preconditions are met, the claimant must be compensated for (or must receive back), inter alia, the property “forfeited, confiscated or transferred into State possession” (section 3). That property should normally be returned to the claimant in natura. If that is impossible, the entity to which it was transferred free of charge must compensate the claimant its value (section 4). The Compensation Act is silent about situations where the property in question was transferred to a different owner against payment; however, that issue is addressed in the Regulation on the Compensation Act application (see paragraph 52 below).
The value of the property should be determined on the basis of the prices applicable on the date of the examination of the claim for damages (section 4).
Where the right to compensation for damage arises, the body of inquiry, the investigator, the prosecutor or the court must explain to the person the procedure for restoring his or her rights and gaining compensation for the damage sustained (section 11).
Paragraph 14 provides that the new owner of the property in question must return it to the claimant in natura within a month of the introduction of the claim, with a further precondition that such a claim should be made within six months of the respective authority sending official notification to the claimant.
As furthermore stated in that provision, if the property was transferred to a different owner against payment and if the proceeds went to the State, “the issue of compensation for its value to [the claimant] must be resolved by the State financial authority”. It is open to the claimant to challenge the decision of that authority before the courts.