The case originated in an application (no. 57752/16) against the Republic of Malta lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by twenty-six Maltese nationals (one of whom had dual Maltese and American nationality) and two British nationals, whose details are set out in the appendix (“the applicants”), on 29 September 2016.
The applicants were represented by Dr J. Gatt and Dr. A Libreri, lawyers practising in Valletta, Malta. The Maltese Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Dr P. Grech, Attorney General.
The applicants complained that there had been no public interest behind the taking of their land, and that the measure had failed to respect the proportionality principle as they had received no compensation for the taking.
On 28 September 2018 the Government were given notice of the application.
The United Kingdom Government did not make use of their right to intervene in the proceedings (Article 36 § 1 of the Convention).
The applicants are all part-owners (in different shares) of a plot of land situated in Għadira Bay, limits of Mellieħa measuring 3,930 square metres.
In 1954 part of the applicants’ property was being rented out as a caravan site.
By means of a Governor’s declaration of 18 February 1957 it was declared that the property was required for a public purpose and thus was to be expropriated (acquired by title of absolute purchase).
At the time, other pieces of land (belonging to other persons) had also been taken under various titles, as part of the “Għadira Scheme” a project aimed at extending the sandy beach to allow for more access to the sea for swimming purposes.
As a result of the declaration, the above-mentioned rental arrangement came to an end.
Over the years, until 1973, the applicants repeatedly made attempts, to no avail, to recover their property, explaining that they were willing to put in place a beach concession.
In 1992 a part of the applicants’ land was given to CS, a private company, under a beach concession allowing for encroachment under specific conditions at the price of 200 Maltese liras (MTL) annually, until 2006. A similar arrangement appears to have existed as from 1974 under a title of emphyteusis.
Some of the applicants instituted proceedings requesting an injunction to stop the transfer to third parties, which was refused by a judgment of 24 June 1993.
Apart from that, the applicants continued their attempts to recover their property including by means of judicial protests dated 10 April 1989 and 18 April 2008. The latter protest included a list of the owners of the land as well as a request to the authorities to pay compensation for the taking, plus interest due.
Following amendments to Chapter 88 of the Laws of Malta, on 13 July 2006 a fresh declaration by the President of Malta (under Chapter 88) was issued and published in the Government Gazette confirming the previous declaration. The price for the taking was established at MTL 7,000 (approximately 16,310 euros (EUR)) but no offer was formally notified to the applicants.
The same CS continued to use the property after 2006, under a different arrangement with the authorities. The arrangement consisted of an annual encroachment fee of EUR 2.33 and a management contribution of EUR 4.66 per square metre payable to the authorities.
The land is currently being used, in part, by private establishments and for its larger part is used for commercial activities connected to the enjoyment of the sea, such as the rental of deckchairs and umbrellas and related accessories.
On 12 January 2009 the applicants instituted constitutional redress proceedings complaining that the taking and the use of the land (without there having been an official transfer of ownership of the property and payment of compensation) had breached their property rights. They requested that the land be returned to them and that compensation be paid for the years during which they had been denied the use of their property. They pointed out that while they had been deprived of their property it had been awarded to third parties to make commercial profits at their expense, and that there had thus been no public interest in the taking.
By a judgment of 14 May 2015 the Civil Court (First Hall) in its constitutional competence, in so far as relevant, found a breach of the applicants’ property rights under the Convention and awarded them EUR 20,000 in non-pecuniary damage. Costs and expenses were to be paid by the defendants.
The court found, on the one hand, that the applicants had sufficiently proven their title of ownership of the land. On the other hand, it had not been proven that, as claimed by the applicants, the land had originally been taken to build a road, which plan never came to be. It rather appeared that the plan was to improve bathing facilities in the context of the “Għadira scheme” also for the purpose of attracting tourism which favoured economic development in Malta. The court considered that the fact that the land had then been given for use to a third party did not detract from the public interest of the measure. Similarly, the fact that land had not been built upon did not mean that no use had been made of it, as the concept of public interest included the aim of maintaining the original habitat or keeping a location pristine.
As to proportionality, the court noted that compensation terms were relevant. However, the applicants had waited until 2009 to undertake proper judicial proceedings on the matter - a fact which weakened their case. Nevertheless, the fact that fifty-eight years after the applicants’ land had been taken a deed of transfer had not yet been signed, nor compensation paid, resulted in a breach of the applicants’ rights.
Bearing in mind that the applicants had not attempted to oblige the Commissioner of Land (CoL) to initiate compensation proceedings, the court awarded EUR 20,000 in non-pecuniary damage, considering that it was not the right forum to determine the pecuniary compensation due for the transfer of the land. It further considered that it should not order the return of the land to the applicants. However, it was for the CoL not to stall any further the process of paying compensation for the taking to allow the expropriation to come to an end, even more so since in the present proceedings sufficient proof of ownership had been put forward. It thus ordered the CoL to take the relevant steps within four months from the date when the judgment became final.
On 1 June 2015 both parties appealed.
By a judgment of 19 April 2016 the Constitutional Court rejected the appeals and confirmed the first-instance judgment. At appeal stage, costs and expenses incurred by the applicants (EUR 5,716) as well as those incurred by one of the defendants (who had not been the legitimate defendant) were to be paid by the applicants.
By 5 September 2018, the CoL had not yet initiated any compensation proceedings.
In their observations, the parties did not dispute the facts as set out above.
In their last round of observations, the Government brought to the Court’s attention an email exchange of June 2016, according to which, following a telephone conversation, a Government employee contacted one of the applicants’ legal representatives requesting information with a view to proceeding with the expropriation. The representative replied that he was aware that the time-limit for the authorities was 19 August [2016], and stated that the applicants were considering instituting proceedings before the European Court of Human Rights.
It appears that, at the date of observations, in 2019, no expropriation contract had been signed.
The relevant domestic law concerning the case is set out in Frendo Randon and Others v. Malta (no. 2226/10, §§ 26-27, 22 November 2011) and Galea and Others v. Malta (no. 68980/13, § 24, 13 February 2018).
Article 2 of the Land Acquisition (Public Purposes) Ordinance, in so far as relevant reads as follows:
“ ‘agricultural or rural land’ does not include the domestic garden of a house or building or any other land within the precincts of a house or building nor a building site nor waste land but includes farmhouses, buildings intended mainly for the keeping of store cattle or other domestic animals, and other structures of a kindred nature;”
The Government Lands Act, Chapter 573 of the Laws of Malta, entered into force on 25 April 2017. Its Article 64 reads as follows:
“(1) When land is subject to a Declaration which has been issued before the entry into force of this Act and such land is in possession of Government without having issued any notice to treat or without having indicated the compensation offered for its acquisition, anyone who proves to the satisfaction of the Arbitration Board that he is the owner of the land by valid title may demand that the competent authority acquires the land by absolute purchase.
(2) This action shall be done by means of an application filed before the Registry of the Arbitration Board that shall be addressed against the authority who shall have a right of reply within twenty days from when it has been served with the application.
(3) The compensation that shall be paid for the acquisition of the land shall be the value that the land has within the period of publication of the Declaration as updated during the years in accordance to the index of inflation published in the schedule of the Housing (Decontrol) Ordinance.
(4) Apart from the compensation for the acquisition of the land as established in this article, the owner can also make a request to the Arbitration Board to liquidate and order the authority to pay him for material damages and moral damages due to the excessive delay for such acquisition.
(5) The peremptory period referred to in article 63(6) for filing such action shall apply mutatis mutandis to the action under this article.”
Article 63 (6) of the Government Lands Act reads as follows:
“Everyone shall forfeit his right of action in accordance with this article if he fails to proceed within thirty years from when the declaration has been issued, provided that if upon the entry into force of this Act, a period of twenty five years already had elapsed from the date of issue of the Declaration, the action shall be filed by not later than five years from the entry into force of this Act. Such periods are peremptory and cannot be renewed.”