The case originated in an application (no. 66822/01) against the  lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Slovenian national, Mr Jože Dolhar (“the applicant”), on 9 January 2001.
The Slovenian Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Mr L. Bembič, State Attorney-General.
The applicant alleged under Article 6 § 1 of the Convention that the length of the proceedings before the domestic courts to which he was a party was excessive. He also invoked Article 13 of the Convention, claiming that the available domestic remedies for excessive length of proceedings were not effective. He further alleged that the delays in the court proceedings amounted to a violation of his rights under Article 1 of Protocol No. 1, Article 3 of Protocol No. 7 and Article 4 of Protocol No. 7 to the Convention.
On 5 September 2006 the Court decided to give notice of the complaints concerning the length of the proceedings and the lack of remedies in that respect to the Government. Applying Article 29 § 3 of the Convention, it decided to rule on the admissibility and merits of the application at the same time.
The applicant was born in 1927 and lives in Kranj.
On 26 August 1949, in the framework of criminal proceedings, the applicant’s father J.D. was sentenced, inter alia, to forfeiture of his property to the State. On 26 December 1949 that judgment was executed by the decision of the .
On 30 October 1991, after the establishment of independence of the  and the change of the political regime, the Supreme Court partly granted the request for protection of legality (zahteva za varstvo zakonitosti) filed by the Public Prosecutor in respect of the criminal judgment of 26 August 1949 and acquitted J.D. of some of the charges.
As for the remaining part of the conviction, including the part relating to forfeiture of property to the State, the applicant and his brother filed a request for reopening of the criminal proceedings, which was granted by the  Unit (Temeljno sodišče v Ljubljani, Enota v Ljubljani) on 19 November 1993. Further to the withdrawal of charges by the Public Prosecutor, the  on 15 December 1993 discontinued the criminal proceedings and set aside the judgment of 26 August 1949.
On 27 December 1993 the applicant then requested the Kranj Local Court (Okrajno sodišče v Kranju) to set aside also the decision of 26 December 1949, executing the initial criminal judgment and forfeiting the property to the State, and to enter the transfer of ownership of the forfeited property back to J.D. in the land register.
In addition, on 7 June 1994, the J.D.’s heirs, including the applicant, started proceedings against the  for restitution of the property forfeited to J.D. before the Kranj District Court (Okrožno sodišče v Kranju). They requested that all the forfeited immovable property be returned in natura.
On 9 March 1995 the  granted the applicant’s request for the annulment of the execution decision of 26 December 1949, but not for the entry of the transfer of ownership of the forfeited property in the land register. The applicant lodged an appeal, which was dismissed on 6 August 1996 by the  as lodged out of time.
On 9 February 1996, in reply to a summons by the Kranj District Court, the applicant informed it that he objected to the institution and continuation of the proceedings for the restitution of forfeited property, started on 7 June 1994 by a group of heirs of J.D., claiming that the restitution of the property could already be carried out on the basis of the decision of the Kranj Local Court of 9 March 1995 alone, which had quashed the decision on execution of the sentence of forfeiture of property.
On 13 February 1996 the applicant requested cancellation of the scheduled hearing, which was granted by the court.
On the same date the applicant also lodged a request for the designation of another court to decide on the case, which was rejected by the Supreme Court on 12 June 1996.
On 16 March 1998, the applicant again requested the land register to enter the transfer of ownership back to J.D. on the basis of the decision of Kranj Local Court of 9 March 1995, which had quashed the decision on execution of the sentence of forfeiture of property of 26 December 1949. On 26 August 1998 the Kranj District Court rejected his request, stating that property in cases such as the applicant’s could only be returned in the non-contentious proceedings provided for in respect of the restitution of forfeited property, and further, that two sets of such proceedings were already pending before the court further to the applicant’s request. The applicant filed an appeal, which was rejected by the  on 11 November 1998.
On 25 August 1998 the applicant lodged a request for the land register to prohibit the disposal and encumbrance of the property in question, which was rejected by the  on 20 March 2000.
On 29 March 1999 the Kranj District Court joined different sets of proceedings for restitution of the forfeited property, to which the applicant, as well as other family members, were parties.
Between 17 May 1999 and 15 March 2001 the court held five hearings.
On 18 July 1999 the applicant again lodged a request for the land register to prohibit the disposal and encumbrance of the property at issue. On 18 January 2000 the  referred the applicant to its previous decisions, that the requested entry in the land register could only be approved after the final decision had been delivered in the restitution proceedings.
On 17 April 2000 the applicant lodged a constitutional appeal with regard to not being granted the requested entry in the land register, which was dismissed by the  on 30 May 2000 as incomplete.
On 16 August 2000 the applicant lodged a supervisory appeal with the Ministry of Justice, which replied on 14 November 2000.
In the years 2000 and 2001, the applicant lodged complaints concerning the refusal of the land register to enter the transfer of ownership back to his father J.D. and the length of the restitution proceedings with the Slovenian Parliament, the Government, the Ministry for Justice, the Supreme Court, the Public Prosecutor and the Ombudsman.
On 15 March 2001 the Kranj District Court issued a partial decision granting compensation for the forfeited movable property to J.D.’s heirs, including the applicant. It awarded each of them 112,879 Slovenian tolars (SIT) (EUR 471), payable in State bonds. The decision was upheld by the  on 18 July 2001.
On 24 January 2003 the court held another hearing, at which it decided on the remainder of the restitution claims, concerning the forfeited immovable property. The court established that restitution in natura was no longer possible, since on the claimed plots of land at Brdo at Kranj (Brdo pri Kranju) several buildings had been built after their forfeiture to the State, some of which were used also by the State for its ceremonial events. The claimants were therefore granted compensation for the forfeited immovable property in the amount of SIT 424,270 (EUR 1770,50), payable in State bonds. The applicant appealed.
On 3 September 2003 the decision was upheld by the . On 13 April 2005 the Supreme Court rejected the applicant’s request for revision.
On 21 December 2005 the  dismissed the applicant’s constitutional appeal. It is not clear from the case file when the decision was served on the applicant.
On 8 April 2004 the applicant again requested the land register to enter the transfer of ownership of the forfeited property back to his father J.D., which was rejected by the court on 14 July 2004.
The following provisions of the 1991 Constitution (Ustava Republike Slovenije, Official Journal no. 33/91) are particularly relevant for the present case:
Article 23
“Everyone has the right to have any decision regarding his rights, duties and any charges brought against him made without undue delay by an independent, impartial court constituted by law.”
Article 26
“Everyone shall have the right to compensation for damage caused by the unlawful acts of a person or body when performing a function or engaged in an activity on behalf of a state or local authority or as a holder of public office ...”
Article 30
“Any person unjustly convicted of a criminal offence or deprived of his liberty without due cause has the right to rehabilitation and compensation, and other rights provided by law.”
The Act on the Protection of the Right to a Trial without undue Delay (Zakon o varstvu pravice do sojenja brez nepotrebnega odlašanja, Official Journal, no. 49/2006) has been implemented since 1 January 2007. Under its Sections 1 and 2, the right to a trial within a reasonable time is guaranteed to a party to court proceedings, to a participant in non-contentious proceedings and to an injured party in criminal proceedings.
Section 25 lays down the following transitional rules in relation to applications already pending before the Court:
Section 25 - Just satisfaction for damage sustained prior to implementation of this Act
“(1) In cases where a violation of the right to a trial without undue delay has already ceased and the party had filed a claim for just satisfaction with the international court before the date of implementation of this Act, the State Attorney’s Office shall offer the party a settlement on the amount of just satisfaction within four months after the date of receipt of the case referred by the international court for the settlement procedure. The party shall submit a settlement proposal to the State Attorney’s Office within two months of the date of receipt of the proposal of the State Attorney’s Office. The State Attorney’s Office shall decide on the proposal as soon as possible and within a period of four months at the latest. ...
(2) If the proposal for settlement referred to in paragraph 1 of this section is not acceded to or the State Attorney’s Office and the party fail to negotiate an agreement within four months after the date on which the party filed its proposal, the party may bring an action before the competent court under this Act. The party may bring an action within six months after receiving the State Attorney’s Office reply that the party’s proposal referred to in the previous paragraph was not acceded to, or after the expiry of the period fixed in the previous paragraph for the State Attorney’s Office to decide to proceed with settlement. Irrespective of the type or amount of the claim, the provisions of the Civil Procedure Act concerning small claims shall apply in proceedings before a court.”
The Denationalisation Act (Zakon o denacionalizaciji, Official Journal no. 27/91) forms the basis for restitution of property (or its value) that had passed into State ownership through previous legislation (agrarian reform, nationalisation, confiscation, etc.).
Section 3 provides that all natural persons whose property had passed into State ownership on the basis of the listed legislation adopted in the aftermath of the Second World War are entitled to denationalisation. Section 4 further specifies that all other natural persons whose property was nationalised by a legal act issued before 1963 are entitled to denationalisation.
The Denationalisation Act governs, inter alia, the form and scope of restitution, the restrictions on restitution and the valuation of property. In particular, it provides for several exceptions in which the property should not be returned in natura, for example if the property belongs to the natural or cultural heritage of the State (Section 17), or if it is used for State activities which could not be satisfactorily transferred to another location (Section 19). Furthermore, in its Sections 2 and 42 to 44 it provides that, where property cannot be returned in its original form, compensation is payable (not in cash but in State bonds payable in instalments over 15 years).
In accordance with its Section 92, the Denationalisation Act originally applied also to the restitution of property in cases where the property was forfeited by virtue of criminal judgments handed down before 31 December 1958. Since the restitution of property to a wrongfully convicted person is otherwise governed by the Act on Implementation of Penal Sanctions, which does not provide for the above-mentioned restrictions on the restitution of the forfeited property, Section 92 of the Denationalisation Act had an effect of introducing a less favourable restitution regime where the criminal judgment was rendered before 31 December 1958. This provision was rescinded by the Constitutional Court on 5 November 1992, partly on the ground that it was retroactive and thus violated Article 155 of the Slovenian Constitution (decision no. U-I-10/92, see below).
According to the Criminal Procedure Act (Zakon o kazenskem postopku, Official Journal no. 63/1994) provides:
Section 538 § 1
“When extraordinary judicial review proceedings against a person, finally convicted (...) have been definitively discontinued, such person shall enjoy the right to compensation for the damage sustained as a result of his wrongful conviction.”
On 30 December 1995, the Act on Temporary, Partial Suspension of Restitution of Property (Official Journal no. 74/95) entered into force, which held in abeyance certain types of restitution proceedings for a period of three years.
On 8 August 1997 the Act on the Temporary Suspension of Certain Provisions of the Denationalisation Act and of the Act of Implementation of Penal Sanctions (Zakon o začasnem zadržanju izvajanja nekaterih določb zakona o denacionalizaciji in zakona o izvrševanju kazenskih sankcij, Official Journal no. 49/97) was adopted. Its Section 2 suspended, originally until 20 December 1997 and subsequently, under new legislation, until 31 March 1998, proceedings concerning claims for the restitution of or compensation for property, inter alia in cases where the property had been confiscated by virtue of criminal judgments handed down before 31 December 1958.
Prior to the 1998 amendments, the Act on Implementation of Penal Sanctions (Zakon o izvrševanju kazenskih sankcij, Official Journal no. 17/78, 8/90) applied also to the restitution of property forfeited by criminal judgments which were handed down before 31 December 1958 and were later quashed (see below the ’s decision U-I-10/92 of 5 November 1992). In its Section 145 it provided that the court which executed the sentence of forfeiture of property also decided on restitution of or compensation for the forfeited property.
The 1998 Act on Amendments of, and Supplements to, the Act on Implementation of Penal Sanctions (Zakon o spremembah in dopolnitvah Zakona o izvrševanju kazenskih sankcij, Official Journal no. 10/98) added new Sections 145A and 145C to the Act. As far as claims for restitution of property forfeited by criminal judgments handed down before 31 December 1958 are concerned, Section 145A replaced Section 145 and referred back to the Denationalisation Act to govern the form and scope of restitution, the restrictions on restitution and the valuation of property, thus providing again for a less favourable restitution regime than granted under the Act on Implementation of Penal Sanctions.
Section 3 made the change applicable also in non-contentious and contentious proceedings concerning the restitution of confiscated property when such proceedings had commenced before the Act came into force, but had not become final by that time.
On 5 November 1992 the Constitutional Court quashed Section 92 of the Denationalisation Act, which provided for the restitution of property forfeited by virtue of criminal judgments which were handed down before 31 December 1958 and later quashed on the basis of extraordinary legal remedies, to be governed by the Denationalisation Act (decision no. U-I-10/92). The court established that the challenged provisions interfered with the effect of final decisions on quashing the criminal judgments and retroactively affected the rights of wrongfully convicted persons. According to the court’s findings, the restitution of this type of property should instead be governed by the Act on Implementation of Penal Sanctions, which provided for a more favourable restitution regime.
Further to another constitutional initiative, the Constitutional Court was called to rule upon the constitutionality of amended Sections 145A and 145C of the Act on Implementation of Penal Sanctions, which refer back to the Denationalisation Act to govern the restitution of property forfeited by criminal judgments handed down before 31 December 1958 and thus provide for a less favourable restitution regime. The court held that the challenged provisions did not conflict with the Constitution, because such interference with the constitutional rights of unjustly convicted persons granted under Articles 30 (right to rehabilitation and compensation in criminal proceedings) and 33 (right to own and inherit property) of the Constitution was indispensable for the protection of the rights of other rightful claimants under the Denationalisation Act, who were similarly entitled to reparation for the wrongs perpetrated in the aftermath of the Second World War (a joined decision no. U-I-60/98 of 16 July 1998). The principle of the Welfare State empowered the legislator, with due consideration to the right of all citizens to social security, to have regard to the financial resources of the State and, in cases which were constitutionally admissible, also to restrict certain rights accordingly.
The Constitutional Court also added that, when deciding on 5 November 1992 to quash Section 92 of the Denationalisation Act and to consider the Act on Implementation of Penal Sanction as the appropriate basis to govern the restitution of the property forfeited by criminal judgments rendered prior to 31 December 1958 (decision no. U-I-10/92), it had been unaware of the full extent of the property forfeited through criminal proceedings prior to 31 December 1958 and thus also of the financial obligations incumbent on the State.
The  further ruled that Article 3 of the Act on Amendments of, and Supplements to, the Act on Implementation of Penal Sanctions was in conformity with the Constitution, notwithstanding the fact that it retroactively interfered with acquired rights, because the retroactive effect of the Act was justified by the public interest.
Since the Act on Implementation of Penal Sanctions does not provide for any particular procedure to govern the restitution of property forfeited by a criminal judgment, the Supreme Court adopted on 21 and 22 December 1992 a legal opinion that such property is to be returned in “non-contentious proceedings, which is a less formal procedure and therefore in favour to the person entitled to restitution” (Supreme Court Report no. 11/92).