The case originated in an application (no. 44580/98) against the  lodged with the European Commission of Human Rights (“the Commission”) under former Article 25 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Slovenian and British national, Mr Ljubo Sirc (“the applicant”), on 13 August 1998.
The applicant alleged violations of Article 6 § 1, Article 13 and Article 14 of the Convention and of Article 1 of Protocol No. 1 in respect of different sets of proceedings with a view to restitution of, or compensation for, forfeited property. In particular, he complained about the excessive length of those proceedings and about the lack of an effective domestic remedy in this respect.
The application was transmitted to the Court on 1 November 1998, when Protocol No. 11 to the Convention came into force (Article 5 § 2 of Protocol No. 11).
By a decision of 16 May 2002, the Court declared the application partly inadmissible. By a decision of 22 June 2006, the Court declared the application partly admissible.
The applicant filed further written observations (Rule 59 § 1). The Government replied in writing.
On 26 July 2006 the British Government, having been informed of their right to intervene (Article 36 § 1 of the Convention), replied that they did not wish to intervene.
Background to the case
Request for restitution and compensation under the 1978 Act on Implementation of Penal Sanctions and the adoption of the 1991 Denationalisation Act
New requests for restitution and compensation under the 1978 Act
The main set of contentious proceedings
The uncontentious proceedings and the contentious proceedings arising out of them
The proceedings initiated on the basis of the Denationalisation Act in  and Kranj
(a)  The proceedings in 
Other applications to the
In a letter of 9 October 2006 the State Attorney-General officially informed the Court that, further to its judgment in Lukenda v. Slovenia (no. 23032/02, §§ 93 and 95, ECHR 2005X) binding the Slovenian State to adopt appropriate legal measures and administrative practices in order to secure the right to a trial within a reasonable time, the Act on the Protection of the Right to a Trial without undue Delay (“the 2006 Act”) had been enacted on 26 April 2006. The 2006 Act came into force on 27 May 2006 and became operational on 1 January 2007.
The Act on the Protection of the Right to a Trial without undue Delay (Zakon o varstvu pravice do sojenja brez nepotrebnega odlašanja, Official Journal, No. 49/2006) has been implemented since 1 January 2007. Under its sections 1 and 2, the right to a trial within a reasonable time is guaranteed for a party to court proceedings, a participant under the Act governing non-contentious proceedings and an injured party in criminal proceedings.
Section 3 provides for two remedies to expedite pending proceedings - a supervisory appeal (nadzorstvena pritožba) and a motion for a deadline (rokovni predlog) - and, ultimately, for a claim for just satisfaction in respect of damage sustained because of the undue delay (zahteva za pravično zadoščenje).
Section 25 lays down the following transitional rules in relation to applications already pending before the Court:
Section 25 - Just satisfaction for damage sustained prior to implementation of this Act
“(1) In cases where a violation of the right to a trial without undue delay has already ceased and the party had filed a claim for just satisfaction with the international court before the date of implementation of this Act, the State Attorney’s Office shall offer the party a settlement on the amount of just satisfaction within four months after the date of receipt of the case referred by the international court for the settlement procedure. The party shall submit a settlement proposal to the State Attorney’s Office within two months of the date of receipt of the proposal of the State Attorney’s Office. The State Attorney’s Office shall decide on the proposal as soon as possible and within a period of four months at the latest. ...
(2) If the proposal for settlement referred to in paragraph 1 of this section is not acceded to or the State Attorney’s Office and the party fail to negotiate an agreement within four months after the date on which the party filed its proposal, the party may bring an action before the competent court under this Act. The party may bring an action within six months after receiving the State Attorney’s Office reply that the party’s proposal referred to in the previous paragraph was not acceded to, or after the expiry of the period fixed in the previous paragraph for the State Attorney’s Office to decide to proceed with settlement. Irrespective of the type or amount of the claim, the provisions of the Civil Procedure Act concerning small claims shall apply in proceedings before a court.”