The case concerns the death of the applicant’s son during an arrest attempt and the domestic authorities’ failure to conduct a prompt and effective investigation into the matter in breach of Article 2 of the Convention.
The applicant was born in 1949 and lives in Lviv.
The applicant was initially represented by Mr A. Buryy, a lawyer practising in Lviv, and subsequently represented himself. The Government were represented by their Agent, most recently Mr I. Lishchyna from the Ministry of Justice.
The facts of the case, as submitted by the parties, may be summarised as follows.
On 25 February 1999 B. complained to the Lviv Regional Department for Combatting Organised Crime of the Ministry of Internal Affairs (“the DCOC”) that unknown persons had threatened her and extorted the sum of 25,000 United States dollars (USD).
According to the Government, an inquiry into B.’s allegations was conducted and it was established that the unknown persons were the applicant’s son, Ruslan Yukhymovych, and his friend Z., both alleged members of an organised criminal group which had been extorting money and property from residents of Mykolayiv with the use of weapons.
On 1 March 1999 the DCOC approved an operation plan to arrest the alleged extortionists by the “Sokil” special police unit of the DCOC, which was composed of senior police detective Zar., detective M., and assistant detectives O. and G.
On 2 March 1999 the above-mentioned police officers, who were wearing civilian clothes, commenced an operation to ambush the alleged extortionists in B.’s house. B.’s 22-year-old daughter and 16-year-old son were with B. at home.
On 3 March 1999 criminal proceedings were instituted in respect of the financial extortion from B.
According to the parties’ submissions, it appears that at around 2 p.m. on 4 March 1999 a private taxi driver Tz. drove the applicant’s son and Z. to B.’s house. The two men approached the house and the driver stayed in the car. B.’s daughter opened the door. Z. was the first to enter, and the applicant’s son followed him. Police officer M. yelled “Freeze, police!” and officers Zar., M. and G. arrested Z. The applicant’s son, who was at the entrance to the hallway at the time, disobeyed the order and started to flee. Officers M. and O. ran after him to the garden gate to arrest him. In the course of the operation, the applicant’s son was shot twice by O. He died from his injuries.
Between 3.40 and 8.20 p.m. on 4 March 1999 an investigator from the Mykolayiv district prosecutor’s office, in the presence of two witnesses, F. and Mar., conducted an on-site inspection at the scene of the incident. Two partial video recordings of the inspection were made.
On 15 March 1999 experts from the Lviv Bureau of Forensic Medical Examinations examined the body of the applicant’s son and drew up a report stating that his death had been caused by a gunshot wound to the chest. The injuries found on his left side turned out to be a perforating gunshot wound. The experts also discovered other injuries on his body, such as a bruise on his forehead and superficial wounds and subcutaneous haemorrhages on the occipital part of the head and the lower lip.
On 24 March 1999 the internal inquiry conducted by the DCOC established that O. had used his service gun lawfully and in compliance with the requirements of the Police Act. The report noted that during the on-site inspection a “Valtro” gas gun had been found near the applicant’s son’s body.
On 25 March 1999 the Mykolayiv district prosecutor’s office, after conducting a pre-investigation inquiry, refused to institute a criminal investigation into the death of the applicant’s son. The relevant decision referred to the results of the forensic examination of the body, witness statements and the results of the internal inquiry and stated that the police officers’ actions had disclosed no indication of an offence, since they had acted in an appropriate manner.
On 31 March 1999 the Lviv regional prosecutor’s office set aside the decision of 25 March 1999 and opened criminal proceedings into alleged abuse of power by the police causing serious harm, reasoning that it had been impossible to establish the circumstances of the use of the weapon in the course of the pre-investigation inquiry and that an investigation was required.
On 15 April and 23 September 1999 forensic fingerprint examinations found a fingerprint on the left side of the “Valtro” gun belonging to the same group as the left thumbprint of the applicant’s son. Three more of his fingerprints were found on the side of the gun’s magazine.
On 16 April 1999 the prosecutor questioned the police officers who had participated in the operation.
B. and her daughter testified that from 1996 the applicant’s son and Z. had been extorting money from their family by force. This had led B. to lodge a complaint with the police. On 2 March 1999 four police officers had organised an ambush at B.’s house. On 3 March 1999 they had seen the extortionists driving past in their car checking if there was anyone at home. At around 2 p.m. on 4 March 1999 they had heard knocking at the door and Z. calling for B.’s daughter to open the door. As she had been scared, B. had escaped into the bathroom and her daughter had opened the door. The latter further testified that Z. had grabbed her arm and tried to pull her out of the house, and that the applicant’s son had been standing behind him on the steps. She had managed to break away and run inside the house into one of the rooms. The women further stated that after the extortionists had entered the house, they had heard one of the police officers shouting “Freeze, police!” followed by the sounds of fighting and a gunshot. They had then heard another gunshot outside the house. When the police officers had returned to the house, they had told B. to calm down because they had “gunned down” one of the extortionists.
Police officer M. testified that the ambush had been planned by an officer of the DCOC, K. He stated, inter alia, that K. had not informed them whether or not the alleged racketeers were armed. On 2 or 3 March 1999, while M. and his colleagues had been lying in wait at B.’s house, the latter had told them the names of the racketeers and that one of them had a gun. On 4 March 1999, while they had all been having lunch, someone had knocked on the door. B., who had had a recording device on her to record the extortion, had been too scared to open the door, and they had convinced her daughter to do it. M. stated that he and his colleagues had spontaneously spread out around the house since they had not had time to think, and M. had stayed in the kitchen. He further testified that on being noticed by Z., who had entered the house, he had jumped out and yelled “Freeze, police!” Z. had not complied, so he had hit him in the chest. Immediately after this he had heard a shot in the hallway. He had turned around and seen the back of someone escaping from the house. He had yelled “Don’t shoot!” and run after the person. At the gate, the absconder, who later turned out to be the applicant’s son, had tried to open it. At that time M., who had caught up with the applicant’s son and tried to arrest him, had kicked him in the back with his right foot. The applicant’s son had then started to turn towards M. and the latter had noticed a gun in his hand, pointed at him. At the same moment, M. had heard a shot and seen O. with his service gun in his hand. After the shot, the applicant’s son had fallen onto the concrete pavement of the yard and started to convulse, with the gun on his left side. Afterwards, police detective Zar. had left to call an ambulance and inform the police authorities of the incident. In order to save the physical evidence, as a crowd had been gathering at the scene, M. had taken the gun to B.’s house, put it in a plastic bag and left it on the coffee table in the living room.
In further statements given on unspecified dates M. changed his testimony and stated that in the course of the operation he and O. had stayed in the kitchen in accordance with the agreed operation plan.
Police officer O. testified that when Z. had entered the house he had been hiding in the kitchen with M. When the latter had yelled “Freeze, police!” he had jumped out into the hallway with his weapon ready to shoot and had tried to arrest the second man, who had taken out his gun and pointed it at him. O., after assessing the situation as one entitling a police officer to use firearms, had shot at the applicant’s son, who had ducked behind the door to try to avoid the bullet. After being wounded, the applicant’s son had run out into the yard. M. and O. had run after the applicant’s son to the gate to arrest him. M. had reached the applicant’s son first and kicked him in the back. At that point O. had seen a gun in the applicant’s son’s hand pointed at M. and, to defend his colleague, he had run towards the applicant’s son and shot him in the back almost at point-blank range. After the applicant’s son had fallen down, he had pushed the gun away from him. He had wanted to turn the applicant’s son onto his back, but he had heard rattling noises from him and had decided to leave him in the same position.
Police officer Zar. testified that after the second shot he had run out to the yard and had seen the applicant’s son lying face down on the ground. He did not remember seeing a gun near the body. After he had called the ambulance and returned to the house he had seen a big black gun in a plastic bag in the living room. Police officer G. provided a similar testimony.
When questioned on 3 May 1999 Tz., the taxi driver, testified that he had seen a gun in the applicant’s son’s hand both during his struggle with the police officers and later near his body.
When questioned on 4 June 1999 Z., the alleged accomplice, testified that the applicant’s son had not had a weapon, since he had left his gun in his car before going to B.’s house. After the applicant’s son had been shot, the police officers had forced him to tell them about the gun and its whereabouts. Z. further stated that when he had been escorted out of the building, he had noticed a gun in a plastic bag on a coffee table, but that it had not been the applicant’s son’s gun.
He later changed his testimony, stating that he did not know if the applicant’s son had had a gun during the shooting.
According to results of forensic medical examinations dated 30 June and 6 October 1999, two gunshot wounds were inflicted on the applicant’s son: one to the back of his right shoulder fired from a certain distance, which was impossible to establish since the bullet had gone through an obstacle – the door – before entering his body, and another to the back fired at point-blank range or from a distance of no more than two centimetres. The death of the applicant’s son was caused by the first wound to the back of his right shoulder. The experts also stated that the applicant’s son could have carried out certain actions after receiving the first wound, that is, he could have run a distance of about sixteen metres, fought back and pointed a gun.
On 20 August 1999 the case was transferred to the Lviv regional prosecutor’s office.
On 19 and 21 October 1999 the witnesses to the on-site inspection were questioned. F. testified that he had not seen a gun at the scene of the incident, but that he could not rule out the possibility of one being there. Another witness to the on-site inspection, Mar., stated that he could not remember if he had seen a gun.
On 28 December 1999 a forensic examination of metallic residues found that the jacket and trousers of the applicant’s son had traces of such residues, caused by contact with a steel object, possibly the “Valtro” gun allegedly found at the scene of the incident.
On 28 January 2000 the investigator of the Lviv regional prosecutor’s office terminated the proceedings for lack of any evidence of a crime. His decision referred to the statements of Tz., B., B.’s daughter, police officers who had participated in the operation (see paragraphs 19-21 above) and law enforcement agents who had arrived at the scene of the incident. The witnesses testified unanimously that the applicant’s son had had a gun during his arrest.
On 25 December 2000 the Regional Court of Lviv set aside the above-mentioned decision and ordered the proceedings to be reopened. The court noted, inter alia, that the evidence as to whether the applicant’s son had been in possession of a gun at the time of the shooting was controversial; in particular, on 21 April 2000 Tz. had made a statement virtually withdrawing his previous testimony and submitting that the applicant’s son had not had a weapon when he had been shot. The court instructed the investigator to question the witnesses further in the light of the above discrepancies.
On 19 April 2001 the Prosecutor General’s Office transferred the case to the Zakarpattya regional prosecutor’s office.
On 27 December 2001 the proceedings were again terminated, but on 12 February 2002 they were reopened as the investigator had failed to establish all the circumstances of the case.
The proceedings were again terminated on 19 August 2002. This decision was set aside on 9 December 2002 by the Uzhgorod Local Court of the Zakarpattya Region. The court reasoned that when terminating the proceedings the investigator had relied on the conclusion of the internal inquiry conducted by the DCOC (see paragraph 13 above), breaching the principle of the objective evaluation of evidence, the DCOC being an interested party. The court again pointed out the importance of establishing whether or not the applicant’s son had had a gun during the shooting, and listed a number of investigative actions which had to be taken, such as a repeated reconstruction of events with the participation of Tz.
On 10 March 2004 the Zakarpattya Regional Court of Appeal set aside the decision to terminate the proceedings of 30 September 2003. The court noted that the investigative authority had failed to comply with instructions issued by higher prosecutors and to answer the applicant’s complaints. The court further noted that the investigator had failed to demonstrate the existence of any evidence which would unequivocally prove that O. had used his weapon against the applicant’s son in compliance with the law. The court also pointed out procedural shortcomings in the investigation, such as the failure of the police officers to secure the scene of the incident and the towing of the applicant’s son’s car without the investigator’s permission. In particular, it had to be checked whether police officers had access to the car as, according to Z., the applicant’s son had left his gun in it. The court further referred to the inconsistencies in the witness statements, in particular concerning F.’s statement that he had not seen a gun at the scene of the incident (see paragraph 26 above). Lastly, the court questioned the manner in which B.’s statement concerning the alleged racketeering had been dealt with and ordered the investigator to ascertain why the identities of the alleged racketeers had not been established and why they had not been questioned by the police once B. had given her statement.
On 28 May 2004 the Prosecutor General’s Office transferred the case to the Ivano-Frankivsk regional prosecutor’s office.
On 31 August 2004 a forensic examination of the video recordings of the on-site inspection was conducted, which found no signs that the examined parts of the video recording had been manually or electronically edited. Furthermore, video recordings on video cassettes from the Lviv regional prosecutor’s office and the DCOC showed a gun on a table inside the house similar to the “Valtro” gun given for examination, in terms of its brand, size and manufacturing characteristics. However, the expert noted that it had been impossible to establish if the gun on the recording was identical to the “Valtro” gun due to the poor quality of the recordings.
On 8 November 2004 the proceedings were again terminated. On 7 October 2005 this decision was set aside by the Ivano-Frankivsk Local Court, which reasoned that the investigator had failed to reconcile the inconsistencies in the witness statements and once again raised the question of the manner in which B.’s statement had been dealt with concerning the alleged racketeering. The court also noted that the reconstruction of events with the participation of Tz. had been carried out in a superficial manner and that the applicant’s complaints had not been answered.
On 30 December 2005, after further questioning of the witnesses F. and Mar., the investigator again terminated the proceedings. On several occasions the Ivano-Frankivsk Local Court ruled on complaints by the applicant challenging the termination, but its rulings were quashed by the Ivano-Frankivsk Regional Court of Appeal. On 17 December 2007 that court, by a final decision, upheld the ruling of the Ivano-Frankivsk Local Court of 25 October 2007 setting aside that decision to terminate the criminal proceedings, reasoning that the investigator had failed to address the shortcomings outlined in the decision of the Ivano-Frankivsk Local Court of 7 October 2005.
On 15 January 2008 the investigator terminated the proceedings without any additional investigative measures. On 12 March 2008 the Ivano-Frankivsk regional prosecutor’s office set aside this decision as premature and reopened the proceedings.
On 7 April 2008 the case was transferred to the Rogatyn district prosecutor’s office and on 23 December 2008 to the Pustomyty district prosecutor’s office.
On 6 August 2009, following a forensic medical examination, a report was drawn up stating that the applicant’s son had sustained two gunshot wounds: one to his back and another to the back of his right shoulder. According to the results of the examination, it had been impossible to definitively establish the order of the shots.
According to the results of a forensic ballistic examination of 19 August 2009, the first gunshot wound was inflicted on the applicant’s son’s back at point-blank range in the hallway of the house; after leaving the body the bullet went through the door. The second wound, to the back of the right shoulder, which caused the applicant’s son’s death, was inflicted in the front yard near the gate from a distance of no less than two metres.
On 13 February 2010 the case was transferred to the Lviv regional prosecutor’s office.
In order to reconcile the contradictions between the results of the examinations concerning the way and order in which the injuries had been inflicted on the applicant’s son (see paragraphs 24, 40 and 41 above) another forensic examination was ordered, but it was not conducted since the applicant’s son’s clothes had been returned to his father and he had destroyed them.
On 17 February 2012 the proceedings were terminated. On 25 October 2012 the Galytskyy District Court of Lviv set aside this decision, reasoning that an additional investigation after the reopening of the proceedings in 2008 had been conducted with a formalistic approach and that a number of investigative actions and forensic examinations had not been carried out. The court also pointed out that some evidence had been lost and that its location had not been established. On 23 November 2012 the Lviv Regional Court of Appeal dismissed a prosecutor’s appeal against that decision.
On 28 February 2014 a follow-up ballistic and forensic medical examination was conducted. It confirmed the findings of the examinations of 30 June and 6 October 1999 (see paragraph 24 above). The experts further noted that there were no forensic signs enabling the order of the shots to be determined.
On 28 March 2014 the proceedings were again terminated. That decision was upheld on 24 December 2014 by the Galytskyy District Court; however, on 21 January 2015 the Lviv Regional Court of Appeal set aside this decision as unsubstantiated.
On 26 March 2015 the investigator of the Lviv regional prosecutor’s office terminated the proceedings for lack of any evidence of a crime. His decision referred to, among other evidence, the statements of Tz., B., B.’s daughter, police officers who had participated in the operation (see paragraphs 18-22 above) and the law enforcement agents who had arrived at the scene of the incident. The witnesses had testified either that the applicant’s son had had a gun during his arrest or that they had seen a gun in B.’s house afterwards. The investigator further reasoned that the witness statements were supported by the crime scene reconstructions and results of the forensic examinations conducted.
On 18 June 2015 the Galytskyy District Court of Lviv set aside this decision, reasoning that the investigator had failed to resolve the contradictions between the statements of Tz., Zar. and other witnesses (the police officers) concerning the applicant’s son having a gun at the time he had been shot and the presence of the gun near his body (see paragraphs 21 and 29 above). The court further noted that the investigation had not established the circumstances in which the applicant’s son had received the additional injuries indicated on 15 March 1999 by the experts of the Lviv Bureau of Forensic Medical Examinations (see paragraph 12 above).
The proceedings were again terminated on 30 September 2015 and 29 July 2017. On 16 May and 31 August 2017 the Galytskyy District Court of Lviv set aside the decisions to terminate the criminal proceedings, reasoning that the investigator had failed to address the shortcomings outlined in the decision of the Galytskyy District Court of Lviv of 18 June 2015.
As at 13 March 2018, the proceedings were still pending. No further information has been provided.
The relevant provisions, as in force at the material time, provided:
Article 4
Obligation to institute criminal proceedings and investigate a crime
“A court, prosecutor, investigator or body of inquiry shall, to the extent that it is within their power to do so, institute criminal proceedings in every case where signs of a crime have been discovered, take all necessary measures provided by law to establish the circumstances surrounding the crime, identify those guilty of the crime and punish them.”
Article 97
Obligation to accept allegations or notifications of crimes
 and the procedure for their examination
“A prosecutor, investigator, body of inquiry or judge shall accept allegations or notifications of crimes [which have been] committed or [are] being prepared, including in cases that are outside their jurisdiction.
Upon receipt of an allegation or notification of a crime, the prosecutor, investigator, body of inquiry or judge shall adopt, within three days, one of the following decisions:
(1)  to institute criminal proceedings;
(2)  to refuse to institute criminal proceedings;
(3)  to remit the allegation or notification for examination in accordance with [the rules of] jurisdiction.
Simultaneously, all possible measures shall be applied to prevent the further commission of the crime or to put an end to it ...
Before instituting criminal proceedings, the prosecutor, investigator or body of inquiry shall conduct an inquiry, if it is necessary to verify [information contained in] an allegation or notification of a crime. [The inquiry] shall be completed within ten days by means of collecting explanations from individual citizens or officials or by means of obtaining necessary documents.
[Information contained in] an allegation or notification of a crime may be verified before instituting criminal proceedings by means of operational-search activities...”
The relevant provisions, as in force at the material time, read as follows:
Article 15
Use of firearms
“Police officers shall have the right to use firearms as a last resort in the following cases:
(1)  to protect citizens from an attack that threatens their life and health, as well as for the release of hostages;
(2)  to hold off an attack on a police officer or his family members if their life or health are endangered;
(3)  to hold off attacks on secured facilities, convoys, residential premises of citizens, premises of State and public enterprises, institutions and organisations, and their release in the event of a takeover;
(4)  to apprehend a person caught committing a serious criminal offence and trying to escape;
(5)  to apprehend a person putting up armed resistance, trying to escape from custody, as well as an armed person who threatens to use weapons and other life-threatening items that threaten the life and health of police officers;
(6)  to stop the vehicle by damaging it, if the driver poses a threat to the life or health of citizens or police officers ...”