The case originated in an application (no. 18882/02) against the  lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Moldovan national, Mrs Iulia Croitoru (“the applicant”), on 14 March 2002.
The applicant was represented by Mrs L. Iabangi, acting on behalf of “Helsinki Committee for Human Rights in Moldova”, a non-governmental organisation based in Chişinău. The Moldovan Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Mr V. Pârlog.
The applicant complained that the failure to enforce the judgment of 30 October 2000 violated her right to have her civil rights determined by a court guaranteed by Article 6 of the Convention and her right to peaceful enjoyment of her possessions guaranteed by Article 1 of Protocol 1 to the Convention.
The application was allocated to the Fourth Section of the Court. On 4 February 2003 a Chamber of that Section decided to communicate the application to the Government. Under the provisions of Article 29 § 3 of the Convention, it decided to examine the merits of the application at the same time as its admissibility.
The applicant, Mrs Iulia Croitoru, is a Moldovan national, who was born in 1938 and lives in Chişinău.
In 2000 she lodged with the Chişinău District Court a civil action against the Ministry of Finance. She sought compensation in connection with her parents’ deposits in the Savings Bank on the basis of a decision of Parliament of 29 July 1994 to revalue the savings of citizens in the Savings Bank in compensation for losses caused by inflation.
On 30 October 2000 the Rîşcani District Court awarded the applicant compensation in the amount of 2,940 Molodvan lei (MDL) (the equivalent of 287.51 euros (EUR) at the time). No appeal was lodged and the judgment became final. On the same day, the court issued an enforcement warrant and sent it to the State Treasury for enforcement. However, enforcement was refused because of a lack of funds in the account of the Ministry of Finance.
Throughout 2001 the applicant complained about the non-enforcement of the judgment to the Rîşcani District Court and the Ministry of Justice. In a letter of 26 January 2001 the Ministry requested the District Court to enforce the judgment and to inform the applicant about the outcome of the enforcement proceedings. In a letter of 26 March 2001 the President of the Rîşcani District Court informed the applicant that the enforcement warrant issued in respect of its judgment of 30 October 2000 had been forwarded to the Ministry of Finance for enforcement. On 9 February 2001 the Vice-Minister of Finance informed the President of the District Court that the judgment could not be enforced, as no funds had been provided for the enforcement of judgments in the annual State budget.
The judgment of 30 October 2000 was enforced on 22 April 2003, following communication of the application to the Government by the Court on 4 February 2003.
The relevant provisions of the Code of Civil Procedure, in force at the material time, stated:
“Article 336. The decisions of the courts and other authorities susceptible to enforcement 
The following are the acts which have to be enforced in accordance with the provisions of the present Code: 1) Civil law judgments, orders and decisions adopted by the courts...
Article 338. The issuance of the enforcement warrant
The enforcement warrant is issued by the court to the creditor, after the judgment has become final, except for cases of immediate enforcement, when the enforcement warrant is issued immediately after the delivery of the judgment.
Article 343. The request to start the enforcement procedure
The bailiff starts the enforcement procedure at the request of the persons enumerated in Article 5 of the present Code. In cases provided for in the second paragraph of this article, the bailiff starts the enforcement procedure following the judge’s order. 
Article 349. The supervision of enforcement of judgments 
The supervision of the correct and prompt enforcement of judgments is conducted by the Department of Judgment Enforcement of the Ministry of Justice.”