The case originated in an application (no. 56443/11) against Romania lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Romanian national, Mr Marian Flămînzeanu (“the applicant”), on 1 February 2011.
The applicant, who had been granted legal aid, was represented by Ms N.T. Popescu, a lawyer practising in Bucharest. The Romanian Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Ms C. Brumar, from the Ministry of Foreign Affairs.
The applicant alleged, in particular, that he had not been allowed to pursue his education while in Jilava Prison, in breach of Article 2 of Protocol No. 1 to the Convention.
On 26 January 2012 notice of the application was given to the Government.
The applicant was born in 1981 and lives in Milcovățu. In 2008 he was convicted of burglary and served a sentence of imprisonment until 30 August 2011, when he was conditionally released.
Between 2007 and 2009 the applicant completed the last two years of his primary education (grades III and IV) in Rahova Prison, within the framework of the “Second Chance” educational programme for prisoners.
Following a transfer to Jilava Prison, between May and August 2010 the applicant lodged three requests with the prison administration, asking to be enrolled in secondary education (the educational stage corresponding to grades V-VIII) as a fifth grade student.
On 29 July 2010 the Jilava prison governor wrote to the Ilfov County Schools Inspectorate (“the schools inspectorate”) pointing out that, under legislation enacted earlier that year (see paragraph 16 below), prisoners were required to receive compulsory education. He included information on the number and educational levels of the prisoners concerned and asked the schools inspectorate to consider the possibilities available to them to complete their compulsory education. In a reply of 24 August 2010 the schools inspectorate notified the prison governor that a class had been set up at School No. 1 in Jilava (“the school”) for primary education and that, as regards secondary education, it was necessary to submit, to the same school, the documents necessary for the prisoners’ enrolment, as required by ministerial Order no. 4370/2000 on part-time secondary education (see paragraph 18 below).
In the meantime, the prison administration informed the applicant that his request to be enrolled had been considered and that he was required to provide his academic record from his previous school. On 2 September 2010 the applicant gave his written consent for the prison administration to request his academic record.
On 21 September 2010 Jilava Prison and the school signed a collaboration protocol concerning the education of prisoners at primary and secondary level in the academic year 2010/2011. Following this, on 28 October 2010 the prison governor wrote to the school asking to be informed of the starting date of the secondary education courses. The letter also stated that the schools inspectorate had given its approval for the courses to be organised on the prison premises, that the conditions for organising them had been met, and that additional documents concerning the prisoners’ previous education were to be sent to the school once they became available.
On the same day the applicant lodged a complaint with the judge delegated to supervise the observance of prisoners’ rights (“the postsentencing judge”), alleging that the prison administration had violated his right to education. At a hearing of 29 October 2010 he stated that the prison administration had approved his request to be allowed to study, but had informed him that no teacher wished to teach in the prison.
While the proceedings before the post-sentencing judge were ongoing, in a letter of 4 November 2010 the school informed the prison administration that the prisoners’ enrolment applications did not contain the necessary documents, as required by ministerial Order no. 4370/2000 (see paragraph 18 below). The letter also pointed out, without reference to any individual situation, that academic records had been submitted in respect of only five of the sixteen prisoners who had requested to be enrolled. It then listed the number of prisoners who could potentially be enrolled in grades VI to VIII and concluded that it was not possible to arrange for teachers to teach each subject to a class containing only one student, as was the case in respect of grade VII. The letter also stated that the schools inspectorate had been notified accordingly.
In a decision of 16 November 2010 the post-sentencing judge dismissed the applicant’s complaint as ill-founded. The decision stated that the Education Act and the Execution of Sentences Act (see paragraphs 1516 below) imposed a positive obligation on prison administrations, together with the educational authorities, to ensure prisoners’ access to compulsory education. The prison administration had taken all the necessary steps to ensure that the applicant and other prisoners had access to secondary education in prison, in accordance with the law. In particular, it had duly approached the competent institutions, and on 29 October 2010 it had sent the school the applicant’s and other prisoners’ study documents and academic records. Therefore, the applicant’s inability to pursue his studies was not imputable to the prison administration, but to the insufficient number of students, which constituted an impediment to the establishment of a class for secondary education.
The applicant appealed against that decision. He argued that prison administrations were under a clear legal obligation to ensure prisoners’ access to secondary education, irrespective of their number. On 12 January 2011 the Bucharest County Court gave a final judgment which upheld the ruling made by the post-sentencing judge. It concluded that the applicant’s inability to continue his studies had been due to a situation outside of everyone’s control, namely an insufficient number of students to set up a class in accordance with the law.
The relevant provisions of Law no. 84/1995 on education (“the Education Act”), in force at the time of the events, provided:
“Compulsory education lasts for ten years. The obligation to receive full-time 
ten-year education ends at the age of eighteen.”
...
“(1) In secondary education, classes shall contain on average twenty-five students, but no fewer than ten and no more than thirty.
(2) In exceptional and justified cases ... a school ... may, with the approval of the schools inspectorate, function with fewer or more than the required minimum or maximum number of students.”
The relevant parts of Law no. 275/2006 on the execution of sentences (“the Execution of Sentences Act”), in force at the material time, read as follows:
“(1) Primary, secondary and high school level education shall be organised in prisons.
(1^1) Convicted persons are required to receive compulsory State education.
...
(2) Classes for persons serving custodial sentences shall be organised and carried out as determined by the Ministry of Education, Research, Youth and Sport together with the Ministry of Justice, with staff made available and paid by the schools inspectorates ...”
The Regulation for the application of Law no. 275/2006, approved by Government Decision no. 1897/2006, in force at the relevant time, provided:
“(1) Convicted persons are required to receive compulsory education.
(1^1) Administrations of detention facilities shall ensure the necessary conditions for the education of convicted persons at primary, secondary and high school level, in accordance with [the Education Act] and the conditions laid down in the 
inter-ministerial protocol between the Ministry of Education, Research, Youth and Sport and the Ministry of Justice concerning the education and training of convicted persons in the custody of the National Prisons Administration.
...
(2) Courses for convicted persons shall be organised within the framework of the “Second Chance” programme.
(3) With the support of the schools inspectorates ..., in every detention facility schools or classes shall be organised in affiliation with educational institutions operating outside the detention facility.”
“Teaching staff necessary for the functioning of schools within detention facilities shall be made available and paid by the county schools inspectorates. Such staff shall be selected in collaboration with the administration of the detention facility.”
The relevant sections of Order no. 4370/2000 of the Ministry of Education establishing the methodology for the organisation and functioning of part-time classes in secondary education institutions, in force at the time of the events, provided:
“Part-time secondary education shall be organised for those persons who have exceeded the age limit for being enrolled in full-time education or who, for social or medical reasons, are unable to attend full-time courses.”
“Enrolment of students shall take place at the school secretariat, from 15 September to 1 October, on the basis of the following documents:
- an enrolment application; ...
- study documents (acte de studii) confirming the previously completed school years.
...”
“Part-time secondary education classes shall contain the [same] number of students [as] that permitted by the legal provisions in force in respect of full-time education.”
Section 21(2) of the Regulation on study documents and academic records in respect of pre-university education, approved by Order no. 3502/2005 of the Ministry of Education and Research, in force at the relevant time, provided that study documents could be released, in general, to their holders (titularilor), and, in exceptional cases, to authorised persons [with] a power of attorney certified by a notary public or consulate.
Article 4 of Protocol no. 13343/2007 on the education of persons in the custody of the National Prisons Administration, concluded between the Ministry of Education, Research and Youth and the Ministry of Justice (“the inter-ministerial protocol”), as in force at the material time, provided that the education of prisoners was to be organised on the premises of detention facilities, in units or classes, in affiliation with institutions of the national education system. Under Article 9 §§ 1 and 2 of the inter-ministerial protocol, classes were to contain eight to twelve students but could be set up for four to six students in the case of prisoners with certain types of disabilities.
Article 26 of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights 1948 states:
“(1) Everyone has the right to education. Education shall be free, at least in the elementary and fundamental stages. Elementary education shall be compulsory. Technical and professional education shall be made generally available and higher education shall be equally accessible to all on the basis of merit.
(2) Education shall be directed to the full development of the human personality and to the strengthening of respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms. ...”
Article 13 of the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights 1966 provides:
“1. The States Parties to the present Covenant recognize the right of everyone to education. They agree that education shall be directed to the full development of the human personality and the sense of its dignity, and shall strengthen the respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms. They further agree that education shall enable all persons to participate effectively in a free society, ...
The States Parties to the present Covenant recognize that, with a view to achieving the full realization of this right:
(a) Primary education shall be compulsory and available free to all;
(b) Secondary education in its different forms, including technical and vocational secondary education, shall be made generally available and accessible to all by every appropriate means, ...”
In its General Comment No. 13 on the right to education (Article 13) 1999, the Committee on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights stated as follows:
While the precise and appropriate application of the terms will depend upon the conditions prevailing in a particular State party, education in all its forms and at all levels shall exhibit the following interrelated and essential features:
(a) Availability – functioning educational institutions and programmes have to be available in sufficient quantity within the jurisdiction of the State party. ...
(b) Accessibility - educational institutions and programmes have to be accessible to everyone, ...
...
According to article 13 (2) (b), secondary education “shall be made generally available and accessible to all by every appropriate means, ...”. ... The phrase “every appropriate means” reinforces the point that States parties should adopt varied and innovative approaches to the delivery of secondary education in different social and cultural contexts.”
The UN Basic Principles for the Treatment of Prisoners 1990 provide:
“5. Except for those limitations that are demonstrably necessitated by the fact of incarceration, all prisoners shall retain the human rights and fundamental freedoms set out in the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, and, where the State concerned is a party, the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights, ...
All prisoners shall have the right to take part in cultural activities and education aimed at the full development of the human personality.”
The UN Standard Rules for the Treatment of Prisoners 1955 contain the following provisions concerning the education of sentenced prisoners:
(1) Provision shall be made for the further education of all prisoners capable of profiting thereby, ... The education of illiterates and young prisoners shall be compulsory and special attention shall be paid to it by the administration.
(2) So far as practicable, the education of prisoners shall be integrated with the educational system of the country so that after their release they may continue their education without difficulty. ...”
The preamble to Recommendation No. (89) 12 on education in prison, adopted by the Committee of Ministers of the Council of Europe on 13 October 1989, states:
“Considering that the right to education is fundamental;
Considering the importance of education in the development of the individual and the community;
Realising in particular that a high proportion of prisoners have had very little successful educational experience, and therefore now have many educational needs;
Considering that education in prison helps to humanise prisons and to improve the conditions of detention;
Considering that education in prison is an important way of facilitating the return of the prisoner to the community; ...”
The Recommendation further states that:
“1. All prisoners shall have access to education, which is envisaged as consisting of classroom subjects, vocational education, creative and cultural activities, physical education and sports, social education and library facilities;
...
All those involved in the administration of the prison system and the management of prisons should facilitate and support education as much as possible;
...
The funds, equipment and teaching staff needed to enable prisoners to receive appropriate education should be made available.”
The relevant parts of Recommendation Rec(2006)2 of the Committee of Ministers to member States on the European Prison Rules, adopted on 11 January 2006, read as follows:
“Basic principles
All persons deprived of their liberty shall be treated with respect for their human rights.
Persons deprived of their liberty retain all rights that are not lawfully taken away by the decision sentencing them or remanding them in custody.
Restrictions placed on persons deprived of their liberty shall be the minimum necessary and proportionate to the legitimate objective for which they are imposed.
Prison conditions that infringe prisoners’ human rights are not justified by lack of resources.
Life in prison shall approximate as closely as possible the positive aspects of life in the community.
All detention shall be managed so as to facilitate the reintegration into free society of persons who have been deprived of their liberty.
...”
“...
 Education
1 Every prison shall seek to provide all prisoners with access to educational programmes which are as comprehensive as possible and which meet their individual needs while taking into account their aspirations.
2 Priority shall be given to prisoners with literacy and numeracy needs and those who lack basic or vocational education.
...
7 As far as practicable, the education of prisoners shall:
be integrated with the educational and vocational training system of the country so that after their release they may continue their education and vocational training without difficulty; and
take place under the auspices of external educational institutions.
...”
“...
Education of sentenced prisoners
1 A systematic programme of education, including skills training, with the objective of improving prisoners’ overall level of education as well as their prospects of leading a responsible and crime-free life, shall be a key part of regimes for sentenced prisoners.”
Article 14 of the Charter of Fundamental Rights of the European Union 2000 reads:
“Everyone has the right to education ...”