The case concerns police arrest conducted in a manner that resulted in the alleged ill-treatment of the applicant.
The applicant was born in 1975 and lives in Sátoraljaújhely. He was represented by Mr I. Szikinger, a lawyer practising in Budapest.
The Government were represented by their Agent, Mr Z. Tallódi, of the Ministry of Justice.
The facts of the case, as submitted by the parties, may be summarised as follows.
In 2011 criminal proceedings were initiated against the applicant on suspicion of his involvement in a robbery. On 3 October 2011 at 1.40 a.m. the Anti-Terrorism Task Force (“TEK”) resolved to arrest him. A TEK unit appeared at his home and repeatedly ordered him to come out from the house backwards and on his knees, and then to lie on the ground and to put his hands behind his back to be handcuffed. The applicant largely complied with the order, approaching the officers backwards and in a squatting position but, given his corpulence, he was unable to put his wrists sufficiently close to each other behind his back.
The applicant submitted that two TEK officers had then knelt on him and twisted his arms, while a third had struck him. After they had handcuffed him, he had been dragged, with his knees scraping on the gravelled ground, to the TEK car nearby, where he had been kicked several times and then forced into the car. In the car, he had been punched repeatedly.
The applicant’s arrest was videotaped by the TEK; an edited and cut version (forty-eight seconds in length) was made available to the media.
According to the relevant TEK report, the applicant was examined on the spot by a TEK doctor and was found to be uninjured. On 3 October 2011 at 3 a.m. he was handed over to the Budaörs police station.
At 3 p.m. on the same day the applicant was transferred to the detention facility of the National Investigation Office (Nemzeti Nyomozó Iroda). At 3.30 p.m. he was examined by a doctor from the Institute for Forensic Sciences and then, at around 7.30 p.m., he was again examined at Szent János Hospital. According to the results of those examinations, he had suffered bruises to his arms and back, as well as abrasions to his back and his left knee.
On the basis of the medical findings, the National Investigation Office initiated an investigation into the applicant’s possible ill-treatment.
On 29 February 2012 the prosecutor in charge of the case requested a copy of the original video recording of the applicant’s arrest.
On 5 September 2012 the prosecutor discontinued the investigation. He found that, although the applicant had suffered injuries during his arrest, it could not be established that those injuries had resulted from a deliberately committed offence, rather than from a police operation carried out lawfully. He also noted that the full video recording of the applicant’s arrest was no longer available, as it had been destroyed following the statutory thirty-day period, during which it could have been obtained for the purposes of an investigation. Although the short, edited version of the recording was available, it did not contain footage of the applicant being handcuffed.
The applicant’s lodged a complaint against the decision to discontinue the investigation; that complaint was dismissed with final effect on 16 November 2012 by the Pest County Chief Public Prosecutor’s Office.
Subsequently, the applicant brought substitute private prosecution proceedings against the two TEK officers involved.
On 5 February 2015 the Budapest Surroundings High Court (Budapest Környéki Törvényszék) dismissed the charges and acquitted the defendants. In the course of that trial, the court held two hearings, and obtained testimony from several witnesses, documentary evidence and the opinion prepared by a forensic expert at the request of the court. It noted that the police medical report sheet that was normally filled in when suspects were apprehended was missing from the file and that the full version of the video recording was no longer available. The court observed that, during the course of the impugned police measure, the applicant had suffered minor bruises on both his upper arms, his right elbow, his back and his left knee. All these injuries healed within eight days and did not indicate that he had been struck, kicked or dragged along the ground, as alleged by the applicant. Analysing the available evidence, the court concluded that (i) the officers had not committed the offence of “ill-treatment during official proceedings” in that the use of force applied had been lawful, necessary and proportional, and (ii) the minor injuries that the applicant had sustained had been caused accidentally, without any intention to ill-treat him, when he had been immobilised and handcuffed by the officers.
The applicant appealed against that judgment.
On 9 February 2016 the Budapest Court of Appeal upheld the first-instance judgment, ruling in particular that the applicant’s wife could not possibly have been an eyewitness to the incident and that her testimony on certain points had been at variance with that of the applicant.