The applicant company, an electronic news outlet, reported information disseminated by the local police and the State consumer protection agency regarding mercury poisoning following consumption of a branded juicebased drink. Drinks marketed under the brand in question were produced by at least two legal entities, one of which brought defamation proceedings against the applicant company before the commercial courts. The lower commercial courts dismissed the claims, but the commercial court that heard a cassation appeal brought by the claimant found against the applicant company and ordered it to pay the claimant a sizeable award. The applicant company alleged a violation of their right to freedom of expression.
The applicant company is based in Moscow and was represented by Ms G. Arapova, a lawyer practising in Voronezh.
The Government were represented by Mr M. Galperin, the Representative of the Russian Federation to the European Court of Human Rights.
The facts of the case, as submitted by the parties, may be summarised as follows.
The applicant company is the founder of the REGNUM Information Agency (“Regnum”). Regnum is registered as a media outlet under the Media Act (see paragraph 38 below) and focuses on reporting economic, political and social news. The applicant company owns Regnum’s website,  (“the website”). Regnum’s editorial board lacks the status of a legal person.
On 19 November 2005 an investigator from the Ukhta district department of the interior (“UVD”) received information from a local hospital that a female resident of the Ukhta District, the Komi Republic, had been admitted to hospital with mercury poisoning following the consumption of a carton of juice-based drink marketed under the “Lyubimyy Sad” brand. The same information reached various local media outlets.
A Regnum correspondent sought commentary from the main department of the Ministry of Catastrophes and Emergencies in the Komi Republic (МЧС – “the Komi MCE”). The correspondent was told that on 19 November 2005 a woman had become unwell after consuming a “Lyubimyy Sad” drink. She had been admitted to hospital and diagnosed with mercury poisoning. An inquiry had been opened into the incident.
On 21 November 2005 a news item appeared on the website under the heading “Mercury found in ‘Lyubimyy Sad’ juice”. In three short paragraphs the item informed its readers that (a) a thirtyseven-years old woman had contacted the emergency services of a local hospital after she had found mercury globules in the carton of an apple juice-based drink bought in a local shop; (b) officers of the UVD and the Komi MCE had visited the scene of the incident; (c) on 20 November 2005 the UVD, together with personnel of the Komi branch of the Federal Consumer Protection Service (Роспотребнадзор – “the FCPS”) had opened an inquiry, seized cartons of the “Lyubimyy Sad” drink and sent them for an expert examination with a view to detecting mercury; (d) a panel of experts had analysed the seized cartons; (e) the work on identifying and seizing suspect drink cartons was underway; (f) the victim was still in hospital in a “satisfactory” condition; and (g) mercury globules had already been found in a “Lyubimyy Sad” drink in 2004 when a pregnant woman had consumed it.
On 22 November 2005 the website published a news item headed “Prosecutor’s office of Komi [Republic] opens a criminal case into the ‘Lyubimyy Sad’ juice poisoning”. In two short paragraphs it related the following. According to information provided by the Komi MCE, on 21 November 2005 the Ukhta prosecutor’s office had opened a criminal case regarding the fact of mercury poisoning. Unspecified State agencies had continued searching for and seizing from shops cartons of the “Lyubimyy Sad” drink produced in the same batch. The woman who had bought the drink carton containing mercury globules remained in hospital in a satisfactory condition.
On the same date a Regnum correspondent approached the Komi branch of the FCPS in person, requesting new information. The head of the branch, Ms G., orally confirmed that mercury had been detected in a “Lyubimyy Sad” apple drink.
In support of Ms G.’s oral statement, the deputy head of the Komi branch of the FCPS, Mr K., sent Regnum by fax a copy of a letter dated 22 November 2005. It named the heads of local branches of the FCSP as addressees and contained the following information:
“[The Komi branch of the FCPS] informs [you] that, according to the information received from [the Komi branch of the FCPS in Ukhta], mercury was detected in the ‘Lyubimyy Sad’ ‘Apple’ drink 0.2 l, TU 9163-043-51114834-01, ‘Vimm-Bill-Dann Company’. Date of production: 30 September 2005, expiry date 30 September 2006. Batch R 09:13 #12. Producer: JSC ‘Ramenskiy Molochnyy Zavod’ R-Russia [at] 1 Transportnyy Proyezd Ramenskoe 140100 the Moscow Region, F1-Russia [at] 108 Dmitrovskoe Shosse Moscow 127591, N2 – JCS ‘Vladivostokskiy Molochnyy Kombinat’ [at] 19 Strelochnaya Street Vladivostok 690087.
Certification mark PR71, AYa79. Packaging Tetra Brik Aseptik Printed in [Kyiv].
Following the above I would propose checks of large [the remainder of the line in the copies at the Court’s disposal is illegible].
Should the products mentioned above be found, I would ask that requisite measures be taken in accordance with the established procedure, including those aimed at a halt of sales until further notice.”
On 23 November 2005 a news item prepared on the basis of the faxed letter from the FCPS was published on the website. It read in its entirety as follows:
“The fact that mercury was found in a juice-based drink ‘Lyubimyy Sad’ has been established (Komi).
According to information obtained from the [local branch of the FCPS], it was an established fact that mercury had been detected in the ‘Lyubimyy Sad’ ‘Apple’ drink 0.2 l, TU 9163-043-51114834-01, ‘Vimm-Bill-Dann Company’, [as] Ms G., the head of the Ukhta branch, informed a Regnum correspondent.
Date of production: 30 September 2005. Batch R 09:13 #12. Producer: JSC ‘Ramenskiy Molochnyy Zavod’ R-Russia [at] 1 Transportnyy Proezd Ramenskoe the Moscow Region 140100, F1-Russia [at] 108 Dmitrovskoe Shosse Moscow 127591, N2 – JCS ‘Vladivostokskiy Molochnyy Kombinat’ [at] 19 Strelochnaya Street Vladivostok 690087 Russia. Certification mark PR71, AYa79. Packaging Tetra Brik Aseptik Printed in [Kyiv].
The [Komi branch of the FCPS] has proposed to carry out checks at large enterprises and shops to see whether these products are present.
Should the products be found, measures would be taken in accordance with the established procedure, including those aimed at a halt of sales until further notice by the [Komi branch of the FCPS]. The entire batch of the apple juice-based drink ‘Lyubimyy Sad’ has been seized from shops in Ukhta, including twenty-one cartons seized from a wholesaler’s warehouse.”
In addition to the three news items above, on various dates Regnum published on the website the following news items: “The prosecutor’s office has not confirmed the opening of a criminal case regarding the juice poisoning” (22 November 2005); “The possibility of natural mercury contamination of the ‘Vimm-Bill-Dann’ juice is excluded” (22 November 2005); “‘Vimm-Bill-Dann’ has denied the allegations that there could be mercury in the juice” (23 November 2005); and “No mercury found in the seized cartons of ‘Lyubimyy Sad’ juice-based drink” (8 December 2005).
On 29 March 2006 one of the legal entities that produced soft drinks under the “Lyubimyy Sad” brand, joint-stock company Ramenskiy Molochnyy Kombinat (“JSC RMK”), brought a defamation claim against the applicant company before a commercial court. They sought a retraction of the three news items (see paragraphs 8, 9 and 12 above) in their entirety, their removal from the website, and compensation for nonpecuniary damage in the amount of 1,000,000 Russian roubles (RUB).
On 7 July 2006 the Commercial Court of Moscow (“the Moscow Court”) dismissed the claim in full. It reasoned that the impugned news items had not mentioned the claimant directly: the “Lyubimyy Sad” brand had not been in JSC RMK’s exclusive use and the drinks marketed under it had also been produced by another legal entity operating in Vladivostok. The Moscow Court rejected the claimant’s argument that the letter from the FCPS faxed to Regnum could not be considered a “reply to a request for information” within the meaning of section 57(3) of the Media Act because it had not been a response to a formal request and it had been signed by Mr K., not by Ms G. who had been mentioned in the news item of 23 November 2005 as the source of information. It found that the disseminated information had originated from the FCPS, a State agency, and thus had fallen under the exception provided for by section 57(3) of the Media Act exempting a media outlet or journalist from responsibility. Assessing the whole series of the news items published on the website between 21 November and 8 December 2005, the Moscow Court found “no grave abuse by a media outlet of the right to disseminate information”. It noted that the defendant had reported on 8 December 2005 that no mercury had been found in the seized drinks and thus had de facto “refuted the fact of mercury detection reported earlier”. The Moscow Court further noted that the removal of the news items from the website sought by the claimant could not be applied as a sanction in a defamation case under Article 152 of the Civil Code in view of a lack of legal basis. It also considered the claimant’s demand for an apology groundless in view of the lack of legal basis and held that to rule otherwise would violate Article 29 § 3 of the Russian Constitution guaranteeing that no one may be forced to reject his or her views and convictions.
JSC RMK appealed against the judgment of 7 July 2006 to the Ninth Commercial Appellate Court (“the Appellate Court”).
On 12 September 2006 the Appellate Court quashed the judgment on the grounds that the case materials had not contained the transcript of one of the Moscow Court’s hearings. The Appellate Court decided to hear the case anew in accordance with the rules set for a first-instance court (see paragraph 37 below).
On 30 November 2006 the Appellate Court delivered its judgment. Accepting that the impugned news items had been disseminated, it disagreed with the claimant’s assertion that they had concerned JSC RMK directly.
The Appellate Court considered that the claimant had been contesting the following allegations made in the news items: (a) mercury globules had been found in a carton of “Lyubimyy Sad” drink; (b) the fact that mercury had been detected in that drink had been confirmed; and (c) the prosecutor’s office had opened a criminal case in respect of the detection of mercury.
The Appellate Court observed that JSC RMK formed part of the Vimm-Bill-Dann company and was not the sole producer of the apple juicebased drink marketed under the “Lyubimyy Sad” brand. The claimant’s exact name had not been mentioned in the news items. The impugned news items of 21 and 22 November 2005 had not contained any statements to the effect that JSC RMK produced dangerous foods containing mercury or any allegations of impropriety or lack of scruples on the part of that company.
The Appellate Court further noted that the statements that mercury had been detected in a carton of “Lyubimyy Sad” drink, and that a criminal case had been opened had been provided by the FCPS by fax at the defendant’s oral request. It rejected the claimant’s assertion that the FCPS’s letter of 22 November 2005 could not be regarded as lawfully obtained information merely because it had not been in response to a formal written request. It reasoned that the news item of 23 November 2005 had directly quoted the letter from a State authority (or one of its civil servants) and that the author of the letter had confirmed its authenticity at the Appellate Court’s request. Noting that the defendant had submitted documentary evidence proving that the UVD had been sending and receiving telegrams, reports and phone calls to and from various correspondents concerning the presumed detection of mercury and related inquiry as of 19 November 2005, the Appellate Court considered that the defendant had not acted in bad faith and had “disseminated the statements with a view to informing [the public] of a socially dangerous situation”.
The Appellate Court considered that the fact that no criminal proceedings had been instituted in connection with the poisoning did not mean that the defendant had tarnished JSC RMK’s reputation, because there had been an inquiry, and the defendant might not have been familiar with the intricate details of the police procedure.
On the basis of the above, the Appellate Court dismissed JSC RMK’s appeal in full.
JSC RMK lodged a cassation appeal against the judgment of 30 November 2006.
On 28 February 2007 the Federal Commercial Court of the Moscow Circuit (“the Circuit Court”) quashed the judgment of 30 November 2006 and remitted the case to the Appellate Court for a fresh examination. It reasoned, in particular, as follows:
“The Appellate Court did not consider that section 57 of [the Media Act] stipulates the grounds for exempting [media outlets and journalists] from responsibility for breaking the laws on media operations.
At the same time Article 152 § 2 (1) of the Civil Code of the Russian Federation does not make the obligation of a media outlet to retract statements tarnishing business reputation conditional on the presence or absence of the fact of a breach of the laws on media outlets.
Therefore, under the general rule of Article 152 of the Civil Code of the Russian Federation, the obligation to refute statements tarnishing business reputation is not conditional on a breach of the laws on media outlets, and, consequently, on the imposition of responsibility under [the Media Act].”
On 25 June 2007 at the claimant’s request following a change in its name JSC RMK was replaced with JSC Vimm-Bill-Dann Napitki (“JSC VBDN”) as a claimant in the proceedings.
On 2 July 2007 the Appellate Court delivered a new judgment in the case. It noted that the burden to prove that the impugned statements had concerned a specific legal person lay with the claimant, and rejected JSC VBDN’s contention that the letter “R” in the news item of 23 November 2005 had unequivocally identified the claimant, and not another producer of the branded drink. It further noted that the item in question had mentioned “Ramenskiy Molochnyy Zavod”, not “Ramenskiy Molochnyy Kombinat”, and that the former name did not appear in the Unified State Register of Legal Persons and thus did not exist. It dismissed the claims in full for the reason that the claimant had not proved that the disseminated statements had concerned JSC RMK directly.
JSC VBDN lodged a cassation appeal against the judgment of 2 July 2007.
On 10 October 2007 the Circuit Court quashed the judgment of 2 July 2007 and delivered a new judgment granting the claims in full. It reasoned that the Appellate Court had wrongly considered that the claimant could not be identified on the basis of the impugned statements. The Circuit Court held that (a) the three impugned news items had stemmed from the same “alleged fact of mercury poisoning”; (b) the news item of 23 November 2005 had mentioned the address of the claimant; and (c) consumers could have confused the names “Ramenskiy Molochnyy Zavod” and “Ramenskiy Molochnyy Kombinat”.
To support its position that the three news items sufficiently identified JSC RMK as the target of the allegedly defamatory statements distinguishable from other producers of the branded soft drink, the Circuit Court referred to the refusal of 19 December 2005 to open criminal proceedings, the reports by the UVD hierarchy of 20 November and 8 December 2005 and the incident reports of 20 November 2005. According to the Circuit Court, it followed from those documents “drawn up in connection with the inquiry by the investigative unit of the UVD into the report of suspected mercury poisoning following the consumption of ‘Lyubimyy Sad’ juice” that “the seizure and analysis of ‘Lyubimyy Sad’ juice produced by JSC RMK [had been] performed in connection with the inquiry into the possible poisoning of Ms F. in Yarega, Ukhta District”. The Circuit Court considered that the above elements had served to prove that the claimant had been clearly identifiable and that the applicant company had not provided evidence to refute them, thus failing to prove that the disseminated statements had concerned a legal entity other than the claimant.
The Circuit Court reiterated its judgment of 28 February 2007 (see paragraph 25 above) quashing the Appellate Court’s judgment of 30 November 2006 (see paragraph 21 above) as regards the applicant company’s line of argument based on section 57(3) of the Media Act, without considering that argument afresh. It observed that the Komi branch of the FCPS had not provided the defendant with official information regarding the inquiry into the complaint about mercury poisoning and noted that the defendant had not provided proof to the effect that the impugned statements had concerned a third party, and not the claimant.
The Circuit Court declared the statements contained in the three impugned news items untruthful and tarnishing of the claimant’s business reputation. It ordered Regnum to publish a retraction and remove the three news items from the website. It awarded the claimant RUB 1,000,000 (28,425 euros (EUR)) in compensation for non-pecuniary damage and ordered the defendant to reimburse the claimant RUB 1,000 (EUR 28.42) in court fees.
An application lodged by the applicant company for a supervisory review was rejected on 19 December 2007.
On 27 December 2007 the applicant company transferred to the bailiffs service’s bank account RUB 1,001,000 (EUR 28,102) in voluntary execution of the judgment of 10 October 2007.
Article 29 of the Constitution of the Russian Federation guarantees freedom of thought and expression, and freedom of the media. Its paragraph 3 states that no one may be forced to express his or her opinions and convictions or to reject them.
Article 152 of the Civil Code of the Russian Federation provides that an individual may apply to a court with a request for the correction of statements (сведения) that are damaging to his or her honour, dignity or business reputation if the person who disseminated such statements does not prove their truthfulness. The aggrieved person may also claim compensation for losses and non-pecuniary damage sustained as a result of the dissemination of such statements. The provisions of this Article concerning the protection of the right to business reputation of an individual are applicable to the protection of such right of a legal entity.
Article 270 §§ 4 and 5 of the Code of Commercial Procedure as in force at the material time provided, in particular, that an appellate commercial court should quash a first-instance judgment if the case materials contained no transcript of the first-instance hearing and that it should hear the case anew under the rules applicable to the proceedings before a first-instance court.
The Media Act (Law of the Russian Federation N 2124-1 on Media Outlets of 27 December 1991, with amendments, as in force at the material time) provided, in so far as relevant, as follows. A media outlet (средство массовой информации) was defined as a periodic print publication, radio, television, or video programme, documentary film programme, or other forms of outlet for periodic dissemination of information (section 2). The provisions of the Media Act governing periodic print publications were applicable to other forms of periodic dissemination of texts created with the use of a computer and/or stored in databases (section 24). The editorial board of a media outlet, or its editor-in-chief, or a journalist bore no responsibility for the dissemination of untruthful statements tarnishing the honour and dignity of citizens and organisations, or harming the health and/or development of children, or representing an abuse of the freedom of mass information and/or the rights of a journalist, in particular, where such statements had formed part of the response [by State authorities] to a request for information or of the materials of press services of State authorities, organisations, institutions, enterprises, and bodies of public associations (section 57(3)) or if such information is a verbatim reproduction of official statements by officials of State bodies, organisations or public associations (section 57 (4)).
Resolution no. 3 of the Plenary Supreme Court of the Russian Federation of 24 February 2005 (section 7) defines “untruthful statements” as allegations of facts or events which have not taken place in reality at the time the statements are disseminated. Statements contained in court decisions, decisions by investigative bodies and other official documents amenable to appeal cannot be considered untruthful. Statements alleging that a person has breached the law, committed a dishonest act, behaved unethically or broken rules of business etiquette tarnish that person’s honour, dignity and business reputation. Where untruthful tarnishing statements have been disseminated through an Internet website registered as a media outlet in accordance with the law, the domestic courts should examine defamation claims arising from such statements in accordance with the legal norms governing media outlets. Resolution no. 3 (section 9) requires courts hearing defamation claims to distinguish between statements of fact, which can be checked for their veracity, and value judgments, opinions and convictions, which are not actionable under Article 152 of the Civil Code since they are an expression of the defendant’s subjective opinion and views, and cannot be checked for their veracity.