The main issues in the present case are whether deportation of the applicant to Uzbekistan and his treatment by officers carrying out deportation amounted to breach of Article 3 of the Convention and whether the Government of Russia, having failed to comply with an indication of an interim measure by the Court, have breached the applicant’s right of individual application under Article 34 of the Convention.
The applicant, Mr Oybek Akramovich Yusupov, is a national of Uzbekistan who was born in 1984. He was represented by Ms D. Trenina, Mr K. Zharinov and Ms E. Davidyan, lawyers practising in Moscow.
The Russian Government (“the Government”) were represented by Mr M. Galperin, Representative of the Russian Federation to the European Court of Human Rights.
In 2013 the applicant came to Russia from Uzbekistan. In 2014 he was convicted of drug-related offences and sentenced to four years and six months’ imprisonment in a correctional colony in Lipetsk Region.
On 13 July 2016 the Uzbek authorities accused the applicant, under Article 244 § 1 of the Criminal Code of Uzbekistan, of participation in a banned extremist religious organisation and instituted criminal proceedings against him. In particular, the Uzbek authorities alleged:
“... While serving his sentence in the correctional colony in Russia [the applicant] met [Mr R., who was also a detainee]...who encouraged [the applicant] to do khijrat [to relocate] to Syria and join Muslim groups that preached the way of jihad... [the applicant] was watching ... videos entitled “In search of paradise” that contained advice on establishing the Islamic State, messages by [Y.], a former “Amir” of this organisation and also Abduvali kori’s [imam’s] calls to khijrat ...”
On 3 August 2016 a search warrant was issued in his name and on 7 August 2016 his detention was ordered in absentia.
On 14 December 2017 the Uzbek authorities requested the applicant’s extradition from Russia.
On 30 March 2018 and 4 April 2018, respectively, the Ministry of Justice of Russia and the Ministry of the Interior of Russia (Министерство внутренних дел (МВД) – hereinafter “the MVD”) declared the applicant’s presence in Russia undesirable. The applicant was notified of the first decision on 23 May 2018 and on 18 June 2018 a copy of that decision was sent to his lawyer, Mr Zharinov. On 6 July 2018 the applicant was notified of the second decision. Mr Zharinov was notified of the second decision at the end of July 2018 during the court proceedings.
On 28 June 2018 the applicant himself challenged the decision of 30 March 2018 issued by the Ministry of Justice, in the Zamoskvoretskiy District Court of Moscow and also applied to the court for provisional measures and to stay his removal to Uzbekistan. In his application he stated that pursuant to the provisions of domestic law, after a decision declaring an alien’s stay in Russia undesirable had been issued, it was sent to the migration authorities with a view to issuing a deportation order. He however, had not yet been served with a copy of the deportation order, which was likely to be issued shortly and would be enforceable immediately. Thus, he would not have an opportunity to appeal against it.
At the end of July 2018, the applicant’s lawyer, in response to his request of 22 June 2018, received a letter from the Federal Security Service of Russia («ФСБ» – hereinafter “the FSB”) dated 5 July 2018, stating that the applicant’s stay in Russia had been declared undesirable and that he had been banned from entering Russia until 2037. A copy of that decision was not provided to the applicant’s lawyer as reportedly “it contained classified information”.
On 28 January 2019 the Lipetsk Regional Court confirmed on appeal the judgment of the Sovetskiy District Court of Lipetsk issued on 30 October 2018, in which the court had dismissed the applicant’s complaint against the MVD and the FSB concerning the decisions issued by those agencies.
On 20 February 2019 the Moscow City Court upheld the judgment of the Zamoskovretskiy District Court issued on 6 September 2018 refusing the applicant’s complaint against the Ministry of Justice concerning its decision in respect of the applicant.
On 27 June 2018 the applicant requested refugee status in Russia. In his request he submitted, inter alia:
“... In [Uzbekistan] I have been charged with crimes against the State on the basis of religious extremism ...
According to the bill of indictment, I was accused of watching banned [extremist] videos in a correctional colony [in Russia]. This is absurd because mobile telephones and the Internet are not allowed in detention... The only source of this information could be the testimony of other convicts who were serving their sentence in the [same correctional colony] and who are now at the hands of the Uzbek authorities. This means that the Uzbek authorities will also need my testimony because no other incriminating evidence can be obtained, given the nature of charges against me.
... In case of my return to [Uzbekistan] I am facing arbitrary criminal prosecution in connection with crimes of religious extremism and I am at risk of cruel [and] degrading treatment during investigation and my trial will be unfair. They will torture me to obtain confession in crimes which I have not committed ...”
The applicant also made extensive references to the reports of international human rights organisations and to the Court’s case-law in respect of forced returns of Uzbeks charged with religious extremism crimes.
On 3 July 2018 the applicant was interviewed by a migration official in respect of his request.
On 5 July 2018 the migration authorities refused to examine the merits of his application. In their decision they stated, in particular:
“... in the questionnaire the applicant noted that the main reason[s] for his leaving [Uzbekistan] were to search of employment and religious persecution... According to the applicant, in case of his return, he “will be tortured, the charges against him are fabricated, he has no links to religious extremism and terrorism ...
... [the applicant] came to Russia to for the purpose of work, he did not seek asylum at the border, and it appears that he did not need asylum at the time of crossing the border.
The examination of [the applicant’s] case showed that he had not been involved in violent incidents, had not been a member of political, religious, military and public organisations, had not before sought refugee status in Russia. [The applicant] did not describe any facts of his persecution or threats by the Uzbek authorities on the basis of any of the above grounds. He replied in affirmative to the question of whether he had been searched for by the police or law enforcement authorities in any state. He could not provide any concrete examples of directs threats against him personally.
[The applicant’s] case-file does not contain any proof of threats to his life in [Uzbekistan]; [the applicant] does not provide any facts of violence committed against him against him.
His claim that he would be subject to criminal prosecution cannot serve as a ground for granting him a refugee status.”
On 30 July 2018 the Pravoberezhniy District Court of Lipetsk dismissed the applicant’s lawyers’ complaint against the refusal of the migration authorities to examine his request for refugee status on the merits.
On 15 October 2018 the Lipetsk Regional Court upheld that judgment.
Between 20 June and 4 July 2018 the applicant’s lawyer in Lipetsk Region, Ms R., unsuccessfully requested to have a power of attorney issued in her name certified by the prison administration. Her requests were refused because the “presence of [the applicant] [was] required in the warden’s office” and “administration officials [were] not currently present”. She was able to have power of attorney certified only on 4 July 2018.
On 5 July 2018 Ms R., requested a copy of the deportation order from the migration authorities in Lipetsk. They informed her orally that the decision to deport the applicant had been taken and that it would be served on him the following day – 6 July 2018.
On 6 July 2018 Ms R. once again unsuccessfully tried to obtain a copy of a deportation order (see paragraph 31 below).
On 6 July 2018 the Ministry of the Interior office in Lipetsk Region (hereinafter “the MVD of Lipetsk Region”) issued a deportation order in respect of the applicant. It referred to the decision of the Ministry of Justice on the undesirability of his stay in Russia. A copy of the deportation order was served on the applicant at the airport, shortly before his deportation. The applicant was deported the same day.
According to the applicant’s lawyers, they could not contact the applicant on the day of his deportation and they were not aware of his whereabouts until 17 July 2018.
On 10 July 2018 the applicant’s lawyer received a copy of a deportation order from the migration authorities.
On 11 July 2018 the migration authorities in Lipetsk Region informed the applicant’s lawyer that the applicant had been deported late in the evening on 6 July 2018 from Domodedovo International Airport in Moscow.
On 30 July 2018 the Pravoberezhniy District Court of Lipetsk rejected an application by the applicant’s lawyers to declare the deportation order unlawful and to order the MVD to annul it. On 15 October 2018 the Lipetsk Regional Court upheld that judgment.
Between 28 June and 6 July 2018 the applicant’s lawyers submitted five requests for the application of the interim measures by the Court (on 28 and 29 June, 5 July and two requests on 6 July 2018). The first four requests were not accompanied by a copy of a deportation order in respect of the applicant, which would substantiate the applicant’s allegations and on the basis of which the Court would be able to indicate an application of the interim measure to Government. Only on 6 July 2018 the applicant’s lawyers explained that the migration authorities had refused to provide them with a copy of deportation order in respect of the applicant. The Court granted their request in the light of those submissions.
Together with the requests under Rule 39 of the Rules of the Court, the applicant’s lawyers also submitted, in particular:
(i)  a copy of the applicant’s request of 27 June 2018 for refugee status;
(ii)  the appeal of 27 June 2018 against the decision declaring the applicant’s stay in Russia undesirable;
(iii)  the request of 27 June 2018 for application of provisional measures to the domestic court;
(iv)  Ms R.’s notification of 5 July 2018 to the migration authorities of the applicant’s pending request for refugee status and his appeal against the decision, pursuant to which his stay in Russia had been declared undesirable;
(v)  Ms R.’s report of 6 July 2018 on her conversations over the telephone and meetings in person with the migration officials on 5 and 6 July 2018.
On 23 July 2018 the applicant’s lawyer in Uzbekistan, Ms Rak., questioned him in the pre-trial detention facility. According to the statement obtained from the applicant, on 6 July 2018, upon his release from the correctional colony three men dressed in plain clothes met him. They made him acknowledge and sign an official refusal of his request for refugee status, while also cursing at him. They then handcuffed him and brought him to a car and he asked them to stop cursing as he was of the Muslim faith. They then pushed him into the car and started beating him, having put a black face mask with eye holes on the back on him. They started driving to the airport, in about an hour they stopped for a bathroom break and they took the mask off after he had told them he would stay calm. For the remaining two and a half hours, he was being driven without a mask but handcuffed. At about 10 a.m. they stopped near the forest, he was handcuffed to a tree, with one of the men guarding him while two others were resting in the car. For about six to eight hours he was standing like that, being bitten by mosquitos, and no food or drink was provided to him. After that, they started driving to different pharmacies in search of some medicines that the men needed to buy. After that for about two hours he sat in the automobile near the forest. When they came to the airport, the applicant was checked in for the flight, and taken to the plane where two other plain-clothed men speaking Uzbek met him. They did not introduce themselves. They handcuffed him, put a baggy face mask on him and took his belongings away. He could not see anything once on board but he heard there were other passengers and he was taken past them in handcuffs. When the plane started taxiing for takeoff, he asked to have the handcuffs taken off. Instead, he was taken to the back of the plane, where he was punched several times. He was told not to talk to anyone and not to look anywhere. In about thirty to fifty minutes, his mask was taken off, the meal was served and he ate for the first time that day. Then [the officers] searched his belongings and questioned him.
The applicants’ lawyers also submitted a handwritten note from the applicant to Ms Trenina in which he asked her to inform the Court that he wished to maintain his application in respect of the complaints under Articles 3 and 34. The note contained a brief account of his alleged treatment before deportation set out in paragraph 28 above.
On 6 July 2018, at about 8 p.m. Moscow time, the Court allowed the applicant’s lawyers’ request for application of interim measures and indicated to the Russian Government not to remove the applicant to Uzbekistan before 17 July 2018. The Court also requested additional information from the Government to be submitted by midday Strasbourg time on 11 July 2018.
The applicant’s lawyers submitted:
“... On 6 July 2018, at about 10 a.m. the officers at the correctional colony informed [the applicant’s lawyer] that the applicant had been collected at around 5 a.m. by ‘lawenforcement officers’ and ‘taken in an unknown direction’. In an unofficial conversation with [the applicant’s lawyer], they mentioned that these were FSB officers who had taken the applicant away. The migration officials informed [Ms R., the applicant’s lawyer,] that they were not under an obligation to immediately provide a copy of a deportation order in respect of the applicant and that they could just hand it to [the applicant] himself. They also explained that they were acting on the orders of their superiors who had instructed them not to make a copy of the deportation order available to [the applicant’s lawyer]. They said that [the applicant’s lawyer] would receive a written reply to her request within thirty days.
On the evening of 6 July 2018 the Pravoberezhniy District Court of Lipetsk applied a provisional measure and suspended the applicant’s deportation order, having held that its ‘decision [was] enforceable immediately’. The examination of the case on the merits was scheduled on 23 July 2018 and then postponed to 30 July 2018 ...
...
... Starting [at] 5.40 p.m. the applicant’s lawyers informed ... the airport police units, the FSB of Russia and in Lipetsk Region, the migration authorities of Lipetsk Region and the office of [the MVD of Lipetsk Region] of [the provisional measure applied by the Pravoberezhniy District Court of Lipetsk].
At 8.03 p.m. the applicant’s lawyer was informed about [the] application of interim measures by the Court under Rule 39 of the Rules of the Court. The applicant’s lawyer immediately translated the letter of the Court and informed the airport police units, the FSB of Russia and Lipetsk region, the migration authorities of Lipetsk Region and the office of [the MVD of Lipetsk Region].
The applicant was deported on a 10.45 p.m. flight from Domodedovo Airport.
...
... [The lawyers] were not able to meet or have any contact with [the applicant] on 6 July 2018. The lawyers were not sure of his whereabouts or fate until 17 July 2018 when the migration authority responded with details and the time of the applicant’s deportation on [6 July 2018] ...
The only response the applicant’s lawyers received in respect of the information [that provisional and interim measures had been applied by the national court and the Court, respectively], was a letter from the office of the FSB in Lipetsk Region of 25 July 2018, stating that they took notice of the information ...”
On 6 July 2018 the Pravoberezhniy District Court of Lipetsk allowed the request of Ms R. and ordered the MVD of Lipetsk Region to suspend the deportation of the applicant, pending the examination of his appeal against the deportation order. The court ordered that a copy of its decision be sent to the MVD of Lipetsk Region and it ruled that the decision was “enforceable immediately”. In reply to the request of the Pravoberezhniy District Court of Lipetsk of 28 November 2018, the MVD of Lipetsk Region responded that the notification had been received on 6 July 2018 after the working hours and examined in substance on 9 July 2018.
On 11 July 2018 the Government, referring to the Court’s letter of 9 July 2018 informed the Court that the applicant had been removed to Uzbekistan on 6 July 2018, that the time allocated by the Court for submission of additional information and documents was insufficient and that they would be provided on receipt from the competent State bodies. On 13 July 2018 in the light of the information received from the Government, the Court decided to discontinue the application of the interim measure in respect of the applicant and to lift anonymity granted to him.
On 25 July 2018 the office of the FSB in Lipetsk Region acknowledged receipt of the applicant’s lawyer’s request to suspend his deportation in view of the interim measure applied by the Court.
On 25 July 2018 the applicant’s lawyers lodged a complaint (report of a crime) with the Russian Investigative Committee alleging the unlawful deportation of the applicant on 6 July 2018 and his ill-treatment during the transportation. They alleged, in particular, that the applicant had been driven in a face mask with eye holes on the back, punched and handcuffed to a tree for a prolonged period of time. In the letter of 12 October 2018 the MVD of Lipetsk Region replied that no physical force was used in respect of the applicant during his deportation. In the letter of 11 February 2019 the Lipetsk Region prosecutor’s office stated that the applicant’s deportation was carried out in accordance with the law, that the competent bodies had not been notified of any measures that would have prevented his deportation and that no facts were established that would have “indisputably demonstrated [a] violation of [the applicant’s] rights”.
On 21 February 2019 the Lipetsk Office of the Russian Investigative Committee opened a pre-investigation inquiry in connection with the complaint concerning the alleged ill-treatment of the applicant.
On 24 February 2019 the pre-investigation inquiry was extended until 23 March 2019, owing to the need to collect additional documents and carry out additional investigative steps. In particular, the investigator stated in his ruling to extend the pre-investigation inquiry that “explanations” in respect of circumstances described in the complaint of 25 July 2018 should be obtained from officers Mr P. and Ms M. of the MDV of Lipetsk Region and employees of the correctional colony IK-2 in Lipetsk Region; that the decisions of the courts concerning the applicant’s deportation and refugee status proceedings should be included in the material of the inquiry together with the replies to the investigative inquiries of the FSB border control service in Domodedovo airport and of the relevant State bodies in Uzbekistan.
No further updates concerning these proceedings have been provided to the Court as of the date of the examination of this case.
A summary of the domestic law concerning deportation was set out in the case of Liu v. Russia (no. 42086/05, §§ 35-36, 6 December 2007).
For a summary of relevant domestic law concerning procedure for examining criminal complaints see Lyapin v. Russia, no. 46956/09, §§ 99100, 24 July 2014.
References to relevant reports by UN agencies and international NGOs on the situation in Uzbekistan were cited in the cases of Kholmurodov v. Russia, no. 58923/14, §§ 46-50, 1 March 2016 and T.M. and Others v. Russia [Committee], no. 31189/15, § 28, 7 November 2017.
The Uzbekistan 2019 World Report by Human Rights Watch indicated that there had been certain promising steps to reform the country’s human rights record; however, many reforms were yet to be implemented. It further stated that a limited number of persons imprisoned on politically motivated charges had been released in 2016-18. Furthermore, isolated incidents of security-agency officers sentenced for torture and death in custody were cited. Amnesty International Report 2017/2018 reflected similar trends, including judicial independence and effectiveness as the priorities set by the authorities for the systemic reform. At the same time the report stressed that the authorities continued to secure forcible returns, including through extradition proceedings, of Uzbekistani nationals identified as threats to the “constitutional order” or national security.