The case originated in an application (no. 69272/13) against the Russian Federation lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Russian national, Ms Kristina Nikolayevna Zinovyeva (“the applicant”), on 21 October 2013.
The applicant was represented by Mr N. Zboroshenko, a lawyer practising in Moscow. The Russian Government (“the Government”) were represented initially by Mr G. Matyushkin, Representative of the Russian Federation to the European Court of Human Rights, and then by his successor in that office, Mr M. Galperin.
On 28 August 2014 the Government were given notice of the complaints concerning the allegedly unlawful and disproportionate measures taken against participants of the demonstration of 6 May 2012 at Bolotnaya Square, the conditions of the applicant’s detention at the police station and the alleged lack of domestic remedies in that regard. The remainder of the application was declared inadmissible pursuant to Rule 54 § 3 of the Rules of Court.
The Government did not object to the examination of the application by a Committee.
The applicant was born in 1988 and lives in Moscow.
The background facts relating to the planning, conduct and dispersal of the demonstration at Bolotnaya Square are set out in more detail in Frumkin v. Russia (no. 74568/12, §§ 7-65, 5 January 2016) and Yaroslav Belousov v. Russia (nos. 2653/13 and 60980/14, §§ 7-33, 4 October 2016). The parties’ submissions on the circumstances directly relevant to the present case are set out below.
On 6 May 2012 a public demonstration entitled the “March of Millions” was held in central Moscow to protest against the allegedly rigged presidential elections. The event had been approved by the city authorities in the form of a march followed by a meeting at Bolotnaya Square which was supposed to end at 7.30 p.m. The march was peaceful and held without any disruptions, but when the marchers arrived at Bolotnaya Square it transpired that barriers installed by the police had narrowed the entrance to the meeting venue, allegedly restricting the space allocated for the meeting. To control the crowd, a police cordon forced the protesters to remain within the barriers. There were numerous clashes between the police and protesters. At 5.30 p.m. the police ordered that the meeting finish early and began to disperse the participants. It took them about two hours to clear the protesters from the square.
The applicant took part in the demonstration on 6 May 2012 at Bolotnaya Square. She was arrested at the venue of the event and taken to a police station, where she was charged with an administrative offence. After a night in detention the applicant was released; on 8 May 2012 she was convicted as charged but exempted from administrative liability.
According to the applicant, on 6 May 2012 she participated in the demonstration at Bolotnaya Square. She conducted herself peacefully and did not take part in any acts of violence prior to her arrest. At 6 p.m. she was arrested by the police and at around 9 p.m. was taken to Taganskiy district police station of Moscow.
According to the Government, the applicant was arrested at 6 p.m. at Bolotnaya Square because she had been participating in breaking the police cordon. At 7.20 p.m. she was taken to Taganskiy district police station, which was also indicated in the record of her transfer to the police station for the purpose of compiling an administrative file. She was released on 7 May 2012.
The record of administrative arrest indicated that the applicant had been arrested at 8.45 p.m. at the police station. It contained no mention of the date or time of her release. It indicated that the applicant had not asked to notify anyone of her arrest. She signed an undertaking that she would attend court if ordered by the judge to do so.
After that an on-duty officer drew up an administrative-offence record on the basis of the reports and explanatory notes of G.S. and M.S., the police officers who had arrested the applicant. These reports and notes were drawn up using an identical template and contained no individualised information except the police officers’ personal information and the applicant’s name. The latter was accused of disobeying lawful orders of the police, an offence under Article 19.3 § 1 of the Code of Administrative Offences. The administrative-offence record reiterated the reports and notes of the police officers, stating as follows:
“... [the applicant], acting as part of a group of 1,500 citizens, took part in an authorised meeting ... during the event [the applicant] committed a breach of the rules on holding public events, [that is to say] she broke the police cordon ... thereby preventing police officers from carrying out their service duties, in breach of Article 19.3 § 1 of the Code of Administrative Offences.”
According to the applicant, at the police station she was not allowed to make a phone call, despite making insistent requests. She told the police that she was the mother of a fifteen-month-old child left at home with a babysitter and requested that her family be notified of her arrest, but this was also refused. Her passport contained no information about her baby. At the police station she was detained in a small overcrowded cell with no sanitary facilities, sleeping place or bedding. She had no access to drinking water and was given no food.
The administrative case file also contained an explanatory note by the applicant. She stated that during the demonstration she had happened to be in the middle of the crowd, which had pulled her towards the police officers. At some point she had been arrested and taken to the police station, even though she had not chanted any slogans.
At around 6 p.m. on 7 May 2012 the applicant appeared before a justice of the peace. However, her case could not be examined that day and she was taken back to the police station. According to the applicant, she was released at about 10 p.m. that day. She signed an undertaking that she would attend the court hearing of the administrative case.
On 8 May 2012 the Justice of the Peace of circuit no. 100 of the Yakimanka District examined the charges against the applicant. On the basis of the police officers’ reports and explanations and the records of administrative transfer and arrest, the court established that the applicant had committed an administrative offence under Article 19.3 § 1 of the Code of Administrative Offences, as described in the administrative-offence record. The applicant repeated the statements she had given in the explanatory note, but they were dismissed. The court decided, however, to absolve her from administrative liability on the grounds that her offence had not entailed serious consequences and that she had a baby born in 2011. The Justice of the Peace issued her a warning. She did not appeal against the judgment.
On 26 July 2012 the applicant lodged a complaint under Chapter 25 of the Code of Civil Procedure with the Dorogomilovskiy District Court of Moscow about her allegedly arbitrary arrest on 6 May 2012 and detention until 7 May 2012, the termination of the rally at Bolotnaya Square and the conditions of her detention at the police station.
On 3 September 2012 the court refused to examine the complaint on the grounds that the contested acts of the police had been the matter of the administrative proceedings and could not be challenged separately. It did not examine the complaint about the conditions of detention.
On 20 May 2013 the Moscow City Court quashed the part of the decision of 3 September 2012 concerning the refusal to examine the complaint about the conditions of detention, and upheld the remaining part.
On 23 October 2013 the Dorogomilovskiy District Court dismissed the applicant’s complaint about the conditions of her detention at the police station as unsubstantiated. On 28 February 2014 the Moscow City Court upheld that judgment.
For a summary of the relevant domestic law, see Frumkin (cited above, §§ 77 and 79).
Article 3.9 § 2 of the Code of Administrative Offences provides that administrative detention may not be applied to women with children under fourteen years old.
According to Article 2.9 of the Code of Administrative Offences, a judge examining an administrative case may exempt an offender from administrative liability and issue a warning if the offence was minor. Paragraph 1.1 (2) of Article 29.9 stipulates that if a warning is issued, the administrative proceedings must be discontinued.
Chapter 25 of the Code of Civil Procedure (in force until 15 September 2015) described the procedure for examining complaints about decisions, acts or omissions of State and municipal authorities and officials. It provided that a person could lodge a complaint with a court about an act or decision by any State or municipal authority or official if he or she considered that the act or decision had violated his or her rights and freedoms (Article 254). The complaint could concern any decision, act or omission which had violated the person’s rights or freedoms, had impeded their exercise, or had imposed a duty or liability on that person (Article 255). The complaint had to be lodged with a court of general jurisdiction within three months of the date on which the complainant had learnt of the breach of his rights (Article 256).
In Ruling no. 2 of 10 February 2009 the Plenary Supreme Court of Russia stated that the procedure under Chapter 25 of the Code of Civil Procedure was not applicable to challenges against actions, omissions or decisions for which the Code of Administrative Offences did not establish a review procedure and which, being intrinsically linked to a given case of administrative offence charges, were not amenable to a separate review (paragraph 7). The above statement was relevant for evidence in cases where certain measures were recorded, for instance in a record of transfer to a police station or a record of administrative arrest. In such circumstances, arguments relating to the inadmissibility of a piece of evidence or measure could be presented during examination of the administrative offence case or on appeal against a decision in such a case. However, where administrative proceedings were discontinued, any actions taken during the proceedings could then be challenged under Chapter 25 of the Code of Civil Procedure, if they impinged upon the person’s rights or freedoms, created obstacles to their being exercised, or imposed liability unlawfully.