The case originated in an application (no. 7516/10) against the Republic of Moldova lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Moldovan national, Mr Aurel Bodiu (“the applicant”), on 29 January 2010.
The applicant was represented by Mr R. Zadoinov and Ms Violeta Gaşiţoi, lawyers practising in Chişinău. The Moldovan Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent at the time, Mr L. Apostol.
The applicant alleged, in particular, that his rights guaranteed under Article 6 § 1 of the Convention and Article 1 of Protocol No. 1 to the Convention had been breached as a result of the wrongful quashing of a final judicial decision issued in his favour.
On 30 September 2014 notice of the above complaints was given to the Government and the remainder of the application was declared inadmissible pursuant to Rule 54 § 3 of the Rules of Court.
The applicant was born in 1975 and lives in Chişinău.
The applicant had a dispute with H. over ownership of a house. He brought a claim against H. seeking acknowledgement of his property rights, as his father’s heir, and H.’s eviction from the house. H. lodged a counterclaim, seeking acknowledgement of her property rights to the house as she had built it.
On 20 December 2007 the Buiucani District Court dismissed H.’s counterclaim and allowed the applicant’s claim in full. H. lodged an appeal. On 20 May 2008 the Chișinău Court of Appeal upheld the earlier judgment and dismissed H.’s appeal. H. did not attend the appellate hearing, even though the summons had been repeatedly sent to the address she had provided in her appeal. A registered letter was returned with a note stating that H. did not live at the address indicated by her. The judgment became final after the expiry of the two-month time-limit for lodging an appeal on points of law.
On 11 May 2009 H. lodged an appeal on points of law with the Supreme Court of Justice, stating that she had only learned of the judgment of 20 May 2008 on 23 April 2009. In her application, she indicated the same address as in the proceedings before the Court of Appeal. The applicant asked the Supreme Court of Justice to dismiss the appeal as being lodged outside the legal time-limit. He submitted that since it had been H. who had lodged the appeal with the Chişinău Court of Appeal, it had been her duty to enquire about the progress of the proceedings and not to wait for a year before doing so.
On 16 October 2009 the Supreme Court of Justice allowed H.’s appeal on points of law, quashed the previous judgments and delivered a new judgment on the merits of the case dividing the disputed house into equal shares between the applicant and H. The court argued that the appeal had not been lodged outside the time-limit because H. had not attended the hearing before the Court of Appeal and there was nothing in the file to suggest that that court had informed her of the availability of the full judgment. The court concluded that without any evidence of the date when H. had learned of the judgment, her appeal was considered to have been submitted on time. The judgment was final.
Under Article 107 of the Code of Civil Procedure, as worded at the time of the events, parties to proceedings had to inform the court of any change of address.
Under Article 433 of the Code of Civil Procedure, as worded at the time of the events, an appeal on points of law would be considered inadmissible if lodged outside the legal time-limit.
Under Article 434 of the Code of Civil Procedure, as worded at the time of the events, an appeal on points of law could be lodged within two months of delivery of the appellate judgment and, if the full judgment was provided at a later date, from the date when the parties were informed in writing of signature of the full judgment. The two-month time-limit was limited and could not be extended.
According to the practice of the Supreme Court of Justice, an applicant is expected to act with due diligence and in good faith and to enquire about the progress of the proceedings in which he or she is a party within a reasonable time. It is not open to parties to proceedings to disregard them for lengthy periods of time and to rely on their own idleness and lack of diligence in support of a request to extend a time-limit to lodge an appeal on points of law outside the legal time-limit. The above principles were stated in numerous Supreme Court of Justice judgments, including Oferta Plus v. S.A. Seminte Nord, 28 May 2009, case no. 2rae-130/09; Balan and Balan v. Asociația Proprietarilor de Locuințe Privatizate, Nr. 51/162 COOP, 5 December 2018, case no. 2ra-2467/18; and Prus v. the Ministry of Justice, 19 December 2018, case no. 2ra-2422/18.