The case originated in an application (no. 16995/05) against Ukraine lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Ukrainian national, Mr Viktor Mykhaylovych Guk (“the applicant”), on 21 April 2005.
The Ukrainian Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, most recently Mr I. Lishchyna, of the Ministry of Justice.
The applicant initially complained that the authorities had obstructed his access to the criminal case file and had refused to provide him with copies of documents which he had required in order to substantiate his previous application to the Court. He also complained of lack of access to court in this regard. Subsequently, the applicant complained, in the main, under Article 3 of the Convention of ill-treatment by prison guards, conditions of his detention and inadequate medical assistance; under Article 8 of restrictions on family visits and telephone calls; and under Article 13 of lack of an effective domestic remedy for his complaints under Article 3. He also complained of hindrance of the effective exercise of his right of application as regards his present case, as guaranteed by Article 34.
On 29 March 2010 the application was communicated to the Government.
On 14 June 2012 the President of the Section decided to invite the parties to submit further observations regarding the factual developments which took place after the communication of the case. The applicant and the Government each submitted further observations and comments.
Having examined the applicant’s request for a hearing, the Chamber decided, under Rule 54 § 3 of the Rules of Court, that no hearing was required in the case.
The applicant was born in 1966 and lives in Cherkasy.
On 23 August 2001 the Cherkasy Regional Court of Appeal found the applicant guilty of murder, attempted murder and illegal possession of firearms, and sentenced him to life imprisonment. On 12 February 2002 the Supreme Court upheld that judgment.
Subsequently, the applicant applied to the courts for a review of his sentence. Although initially the courts refused the requested review, in 2009 the Supreme Court changed the applicant’s sentence to fifteen years’ imprisonment, considering that life imprisonment had been imposed on him not in compliance with the law.
During the investigations and trial the applicant was held in the Cherkasy Temporary Investigative Isolation Unit (“the SIZO”) No. 30. He remained there until 22 September 2004, when he was transferred to Kyiv SIZO no. 13.
On 15 October 2004 the applicant was placed in Sokalska Correctional Colony no. 47 in the Lviv Region (“Sokalska Prison”). In November 2007 he was transferred to the Zamkova Correctional Colony no. 58, in the Khmelnytsk Region (“Zamkova Prison”).
In May 2012 the applicant suffered an ischemic stroke and was taken to a hospital within the Shepetivska Correctional Colony No. 98, in which he underwent treatment as regards the stroke and generally hypertension. On 23 October 2012 the applicant was released from prison. In particular, it was noted that given his health condition he could no longer serve his sentence and he no longer posed danger to the society.
According to the applicant, on the day he arrived at Sokalska Prison (15 October 2004) he was beaten by several guards. As a result, he allegedly suffered an eye injury and several bruises and scratches on his body. Subsequently, the applicant was placed in a cell in which he was visited by a group of officers, including the prison governor and medical officer, with a view to completing the formalities related to the applicant’s transfer to that prison. The applicant claimed to have complained to those officers that he had been beaten up, but to no avail. Allegedly, his injuries were not noted and he received no medical assistance. In October 2005 the applicant was diagnosed with left-eye mydriasis of traumatic origin, which allegedly developed because of the eye injury he had received on 15 October 2004.
The applicant stated that on 19 October 2004 he had asked the prison authorities to send a complaint about his alleged beating to a prosecutor. The administration of the prison refused to send that complaint or other similar complaints which the applicant continued submitting after that date.
On 28 June 2006, during an official visit to the prison by a prosecutor in charge of supervising the prison authorities’ compliance with the law, the applicant handed his complaint of beating to that prosecutor.
By a decision of 18 August 2006, the prosecutor refused to open a criminal investigation into the applicant’s complaint, finding that there was no evidence of the alleged beating. The prosecutor based his decision on the information available from the applicant’s medical file and the written statements obtained from the prison staff, including the medical officer who had examined the applicant upon his arrival at the prison, and also from some of the prisoners who had been transferred to the prison on the same day as the applicant. Those prisoners, except for one of them, L., stated that the prison staff had not beaten or otherwise ill-treated them. L. stated that he had been punched on the limbs and back, but that he had not seen other prisoners being beaten.
On 26 October 2006 the applicant challenged the prosecutor’s decision before the courts, stating that it had not been based on the facts. In support of his appeal, the applicant submitted a statement, allegedly written by L. in June 2005, that the applicant had had bruises on his limbs on 16 October 2004.
The courts at two levels of jurisdiction upheld the prosecutor’s findings, relying, in the main, on the material contained in the prosecutor’s file concerning the applicant’s complaint that he had been beaten.
The applicant stated that the courts had refused his requests to be heard in person and for the prisoners who had been detained with him in Sokalska Prison to be questioned. The applicant lodged a cassation appeal with the Supreme Court.
On 17 December 2007 the Supreme Court refused to consider the applicant’s cassation appeal, because he had failed to submit certified copies of the lower courts’ decisions. On 30 January 2008 the applicant sent the required copies to the Supreme Court, asking it to review his case in cassation. The applicant did not provide any further information concerning that set of proceedings.
During his detention in Sokalska Prison between October 2004 and November 2007 the applicant stayed in cells of twelve square metres, together with three other inmates. According to him, as the cells contained sanitary facilities, four bunks, a table and two benches, the applicant and his cellmates had very limited living space, which, given the fact that they spent twenty-three hours a day in the cell and were not allowed to take physical exercise, was humiliating and intolerable. The cells were unventilated, always damp, and not sufficiently heated in winter. For several weeks in 2004 and 2005 the applicant was held in the same cells in which inmates suffering from the open form of tuberculosis were also detained.
Every time he left his cell the applicant was handcuffed and was followed by several prison officers with a guard dog. While the applicant was escorted to a medical unit or a meeting place, allegedly a felt-lined bag was put over his head, which prevented him from seeing and limited his air supply. When the applicant was taken out of his cell to the exercise area he was allegedly obliged to walk with his hands handcuffed behind his back and raised above his head, causing him physical and mental suffering. The exercise area measured about twenty-two square metres; it was damp and lacked direct sunlight.
According to the applicant, the food and water provided to him and other prisoners were unsatisfactory and hazardous to their health. The prison authorities did not ensure adequate sanitary conditions and he was not offered a chance to work and earn money to enable him to purchase medicine, sanitary supplies or additional food.
In 2005-06 the applicant allegedly tried to complain to prosecutors about the conditions of his detention. However, the prison authorities refused to send, or delayed sending, about twenty letters addressed by the applicant to prosecutors. Although some of his letters reached the prosecutors, his complaints about the conditions of his detention contained in those letters were not examined.
According to the Government, a part of the applicant’s submissions concerning the conditions of his detention, specifically his allegations that he had been detained in cells with poor sanitary and hygiene conditions together with inmates suffering from the open form of tuberculosis, that he had been escorted to a medical unit or a meeting place with a felt-lined bag over his head, and that while handcuffed he had been obliged to walk with his hands raised above his head, were untrue and not supported by any evidence.
The Government stated that the open-air exercise area measured twenty-four square metres and was equipped with a canopy protecting inmates from rain and snow. It was not dark or damp. There was also equipment enabling inmates to do physical exercises.
They further submitted that the applicant had had no opportunity to work, as at the time no facilities for work were available in the maximum security sector of Sokalska Prison. The food and water was regularly checked and was of adequate quality.
The Government contended that the applicant had made no complaint to the domestic authorities concerning the material conditions of his detention.
According to the applicant, his principal health problem was hypertension and in 2005 he had had four heart attacks. Allegedly, he had not received adequate medical treatment in that regard and had not been allowed to keep medication he needed.
In August 2005 the applicant complained of inadequate medical assistance to a prosecutor in charge of supervising the prison authorities’ compliance with the law. The prosecutor conducted an inquiry into the applicant’s complaints of inadequate medical assistance. The prosecutor found that the medical assistance provided to the applicant by the administration of the prison had been adequate; the applicant was informed of this by a letter of 3 November 2005. The prosecutor’s finding was based on the information contained in the applicant’s medical file, according to which the applicant had received treatment for hypertension in October and December 2004, in January and February 2005, and between April and July 2005, which included the administration of inosine, nitroglycerinum and other medication. It was noted that the applicant had also been given the medication his relatives had sent him. The treatment prescribed by the prison doctors was later endorsed by a cardiologist from a civilian hospital, who examined the applicant in August 2005.
The applicant disagreed with the prosecutor’s findings and complained to the Sokal Town Court. By a ruling of 20 February 2006, the court refused to deal with the applicant’s complaint, holding that the matter fell outside the court’s jurisdiction. On 14 August 2006 the Lviv Regional Court of Appeal upheld that ruling. On 8 July 2008 the Higher Administrative Court quashed those decisions, finding that the matter had to be examined in the framework of the administrative proceedings. The case was remitted to the Lviv Administrative Court for fresh examination. By a ruling of 16 October 2008, that court returned the case, refusing to examine it as the applicant had failed to submit a formal claim with documents in support. The applicant did not pursue the matter further.
According to the information submitted by the Government, throughout the period of his detention in the SIZO and in Sokalska Prison the applicant had been examined by various doctors, including doctors from civilian medical institutions, and had been provided with treatment for different medical issues he had at the time, including hypertension.
According to the applicant, during his post-conviction detention he maintained contact with his wife, two minor children whose ages were not specified, his mother, and four other relatives. Generally, he was entitled to family visits no more than once every six months and for no longer than four hours per visit.
During his stay in the Cherkasy SIZO allegedly only three adults and one child or two adults and two children could be present at any one time at such meetings. In Sokalska Prison no more than two adults and one child could be present at any one time. His family members, who lived in the Cherkasy Region, had experienced difficulties travelling to see him in Sokalska Prison, which is in the Lviv Region (about 700 km away).
In that prison, only one room was made available for family visits, on a specified day (Sunday), which, because of the high demand for such visits, usually resulted in the duration of the visits being substantially reduced. In particular, the applicant’s meetings with his family on 28 November 2004, 29 May 2005 and 28 November 2006 lasted no longer than two hours, whereas on 27 November 2005 and 28 May 2006 they lasted no longer than three hours.
The family visits took place in the presence of a guard with a guard dog; the applicant was placed in a cage and separated from the others by a glass partition. The applicant and his visitors had to use a telephone during such meetings and their conversations were constantly monitored by a prison guard.
Despite numerous requests by the applicant, the administration of the Cherkasy SIZO and Sokalska Prison did not allow him to have any intimate contact with his wife. The refusal was based on the ground that prisoners sentenced to life imprisonment did not have a statutory right to long family meetings.
Between 15 October 2004 and 2 November 2005 the applicant allegedly was not allowed to make any telephone calls to his family. On the latter date he was allowed to make a telephone call to his wife, the duration of which was limited to five minutes. Subsequently, the applicant was only allowed to receive telephone calls once every three months upon his written request.
The applicant complained to the Sokalska Prison authorities about the above-mentioned restrictions on family visits and telephone calls. In reply, they provided the applicant with extracts of the provisions of the Code on the Execution of Sentences of 2003 governing the conditions of detention of persons sentenced to life imprisonment.
The Government challenged the trustworthiness of part of the applicant’s submissions concerning restrictions on family visits and telephone calls, specifically his allegations that family visits had lasted less than two hours, that he had not been allowed to make telephone calls between 15 October 2004 and 2 November 2005, that other restrictions had been imposed on his right to make telephone calls after 2 November 2005, that only three adults and one minor child or two adults and two minor children had been allowed to visit him at any one time in the Cherkasy SIZO, that only two adults and two minor children had been allowed to visit him at any one time in Sokalska Prison, and that those visits had taken place in the presence of a guard with a guard dog. The Government further stated that the applicant had not raised those complaints before the domestic authorities.
In a letter dated 19 May 2012 the applicant stated that the Court’s letter, sent to him in January 2012, had been opened and read by the administration of Zamkova Prison no. 58, where he had been serving a prison sentence, and that he had been persecuted by the administration of the Prison for communicating with the Court. In particular, the applicant was placed in solitary confinement for the period from 28 January to 15 May 2012; on an unspecified date all the documents in his possession and his pen were taken from him; and he was not given the opportunity to contact his relatives for two months, the exact calendar period not being specified. The applicant also stated that before those events he had been subjected to disciplinary sanctions when he had received letters from the Court in detention, but provided no details in this regard.
The Government in their turn contended that no letter to the applicant had been opened, that there had been no interference with his communication with the outside world, and that the applicant’s allegations of persecution for complaining to the Court were wholly unfounded. According to them, the applicant was disciplined on several occasions for breaches of prison regulations, which included, inter alia, not respecting the prison daily schedule and insulting the prison guards.
On 4 July 2002 the applicant lodged an application with the Court, complaining, inter alia, under Article 3 of the Convention that he had been tortured by the police and under Articles 6 and 7 of the Convention that he had been unfairly convicted and that his sentence had not been based on the law in force at the material time.
In order to substantiate his complaints before the Court, the applicant tried to obtain from the domestic courts copies of various documents from his criminal case file. By letters dated 19 April and 10 May 2002 and 26 March 2003 his requests for copies of documents were refused by the President and Vice-President of the Cherkasy Regional Court of Appeal as having no basis in law.
In 2002-03 the applicant’s mother and wife, who were given leave to represent him during his trial (see paragraph 8 above) and after the trial by a ruling of 6 March 2003 issued by a judge of the Cherkasy Regional Court of Appeal, visited that court on several occasions with a view to obtaining copies of the documents from the applicant’s criminal case file. According to the applicant, they were not allowed to consult the file or to take any documents from it. On an unspecified date their copy of the ruling of 6 March 2003 was allegedly taken and not returned by that judge.
By letters dated 19 August 2003 and 25 February 2004, the Court asked the applicant to submit documentary evidence in respect of his complaints under Articles 3 and 6 of the Convention. In particular, he was invited to submit copies of his written complaints to the national authorities concerning his alleged ill-treatment, a copy of the prosecutor’s decision concerning those complaints, a copy of his cassation appeal against the judgment of the Cherkasy Regional Court of Appeal of 23 August 2001, and copies of his written applications to have a witness on his behalf examined by that court.
Further to the Court’s letters, the applicant submitted several requests to the Donetsk Regional Court of Appeal, asking for copies of the requested documents. The applicant’s requests were refused, but he was informed that, at the request of the Court, the entire criminal case file would be sent to it.
On an unspecified date the applicant’s mother hired a lawyer to represent the applicant before the authorities. The lawyer obtained copies of the documents indicated in the Court’s letters, and they were subsequently submitted to the Court. However, the applicant stated that the lawyer had not obtained copies of all the necessary documents, and that the applicant’s mother’s further attempts to obtain copies of additional documents had been unsuccessful.
Meanwhile, the applicant lodged a complaint with the Prydniprovskyy District Court against the judges of the Cherkasy Regional Court of Appeal, challenging their refusal to provide him with copies of documents from his case file or to allow his relatives to represent him before the domestic authorities.
On 10 June 2004 the court dismissed the applicant’s complaint, holding that the matter did not fall to be considered by the courts. On 16 November 2004 the Cherkasy Regional Court of Appeal confirmed the ruling of the first-instance court.
On 16 June 2006 the Higher Administrative Court rejected the applicant’s cassation appeal as lodged out of time. According to the applicant, he missed the deadline because the Sokalska Prison authorities had failed to dispatch his correspondence on time. The applicant lodged a new cassation appeal with the Higher Administrative Court, together with a request for an extension of the time-limit. The outcome of that appeal is unknown.
On 27 March 2007 the Court declared the applicant’s previous application inadmissible.
Article 30 provided that prisoners sentenced to imprisonment, who were temporarily in an investigative isolation unit (SIZO), were subject to the rules governing detention at the type of penal institution in which they were to be placed pursuant to their sentence. They were allowed to have only short meetings with relatives and other persons.
Under Article 39, prisoners sentenced to life imprisonment were entitled to have a four-hour meeting with relatives or other persons in the presence of a prison guard once every six months. Provided it was technically possible, once every three months they were allowed a fifteenminute telephone call under the supervision of the prison authorities and against a charge for its cost.
Article 150 provided that prisoners sentenced to life imprisonment were to serve their sentences in correctional colonies of the highest level of security.
Pursuant to Article 151, they were, as a rule, placed in two-person cells. In certain circumstances they could be placed in solitary confinement. They were allowed to have one hour’s exercise daily. Prior to the amendments to the Code on 21 January 2010 (which came into effect on 16 February 2010), life prisoners were entitled to short visits (up to four hours) from their relatives and other persons once every six months. With those amendments, life prisoners became entitled to such visits once every three months.
Prisoners were also entitled to have four fifteen-minute telephone conversations a year under the supervision of the prison authorities, the costs of which were to be borne by prisoners (Article 110).
The rules governing the detention of prisoners sentenced to life imprisonment subjected them to special restrictions as regards physical conditions, activities and opportunities for human contact, which included permanent separation from the rest of the prison population, limited visit entitlements, prohibition of communication with other prisoners, and being escorted by three officers with a guard dog and handcuffed with their arms behind their back whenever they were taken out of their cell (Sections 2325).
Pursuant to Section 26, the admission of newly arriving prisoners was carried out by a commission composed of the prison staff, including medical officers, and headed by the prison governor. Upon their arrival at the prison, prisoners had to undergo a medical examination.
Under Section 47, prisoners were entitled to meetings with no more than three adults at one time; these could also be accompanied by the prisoner’s minor children.
Pursuant to Section 94, prisoners sentenced to life imprisonment were to receive medical assistance, as a rule, in their cells in the presence of at least three guards. Prisoners were to be transferred to a medical institution of the State Department for the Execution of Sentences, or to a civilian medical institution, if they needed urgent medical assistance.
Annex 9 to the Regulations provided that prisoners were not allowed to keep in their possession any medication or medical items.
Annex 17 provided for two options of equipping a room for short meetings. According to the first option, the meeting room was to be equipped with tables along the room separated by free space of 120 centimetres in width. There were to be no more than ten chairs for visitors; stools for the prisoners were to be fixed to the floor.
According to the second option, a meeting room was to be equipped with booths 80 centimetres in width and 100 centimetres in length. One or two booths were to be of 140 centimetres in width to accommodate two visitors or visitors with children coming to see the same prisoner. The visitors’ booths and the prisoners’ booths were to be separated by glass partitions. Booths were to be equipped with a loudspeaker and a telephone handset. Booths for life prisoners had to be additionally equipped with metal bars and doors with mechanical locks. The supervising officer’s table was to be equipped with a device for listening to the conversations in the booths.
The Council of Europe material pertaining to family visits to prisoners was quoted in Trosin v. Ukraine (no. 39758/05, §§ 3031, 23 February 2012).