The case originated in an application (no. 46677/06) against the  lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a German national, Ms Susanne Minarik (“the applicant”), on 14 November 2006.
The applicant was represented by Mr P. Zima, a lawyer practising in . The Czech Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Mr V. A. Schorm, of the Ministry of Justice.
The applicant alleged, in particular, a violation of her right of access to court under Article 6 of the Convention.
On 25 November 2009 the President of the Fifth Section decided to give notice of the application to the Government. It was also decided to examine the merits of the application at the same time as its admissibility (Article 29 § 1).
The applicant was born in 1975 and lives in .
The relevant domestic law and practice are set out in the Court's judgment Kohlhofer and Minarik v. the Czech Republic, nos. 32921/03, 28464/04 and 5344/06, §§ 40-70, 15 October 2009.
In decision no. Pl. ÚS. 51/03 of 22 February 2005 (referred to at paragraph 36 of the above-mentioned Kohlhofer and Minarik judgment), the  rejected a request of the  to strike down several provisions of the Commercial Code regulating the winding up of a company. The  had determined that those provisions had been applicable to proceedings before it instituted by minority shareholders seeking to set aside a resolution on the winding up of a company and the transfer of all its assets to the main shareholder. The  held as follows:
“[Under the provisions on the concrete review of the constitutionality of any law,] the  can only decide on the constitutionality of a law that is applicable to the proceedings.
...
According to Section 131(3)(c) of the Commercial Code, a court will reject an action to set aside a general meeting resolution if the decision to allow the entry [in the commercial register] of the transfer of all company's assets to the main shareholder has become final.
As mentioned above, the  stayed the proceedings on 14 January 2003, that is, two months after the decision to allow the entry of the transfer of all of the company's assets to the main shareholder became final. If the Ostrava Regional Court sent its request to strike down the provisions of the Commercial Code only in December 2003, it is obvious that it did so at a time when it could not have decided on the merits of the action because of the [effect of] Section 131(3)(c) of the Commercial Code. In other words, it could not have used the provisions whose constitutionality it disputes. Thus, these provisions are not “a law that is applicable to the proceedings.”