The case concerns legislative intervention in the course of ongoing proceedings. In particular, the applicant complained, under Article 6 § 1 of the Convention, that the enactment of Law no. 296/2006 had denied her her right to a fair trial.
The applicant was born in 1939 and lives in Gorlago. She was represented by Mrs E. Fatuzzo, a lawyer practising in Bergamo.
The Government were represented by their former Agent, Mrs E. Spatafora, and their former co-Agent, Mrs M. L. Aversano.
The circumstances of the case are analogous to those described in Maggio and Others v. Italy (nos. 46286/09 and 4 others, 31 May 2011) and Stefanetti and Others v. Italy (merits) (nos. 21838/10 and 7 others, 15 April 2014).
In June 1999 the applicant’s late husband, S.B., who had transferred to Italy the pension contributions he had paid in Switzerland, lodged an application with the Istituto Nazionale della Previdenza Sociale (“INPS”) for his pension to be recalculated, in accordance with the 1962 Italo-Swiss Social Security Convention (see “Relevant legal framework and practice” below and the authorities cited therein), on the basis of the contributions he had paid in Switzerland in respect of work that he had performed there over several years. As a basis for the calculation of his pension (in respect of his average remuneration over the final five years of his working life), the INPS employed a theoretical level of remuneration (“retribuzione teorica”) instead of the actual remuneration (“retribuzione effettiva”). The former resulted in a readjustment on the basis of the existing ratio between the social security contributions paid in, respectively, Switzerland (8%) and in Italy (32.7%), which meant that the calculation had as its basis a notional salary, which, according to S.B., led him to receive a pension equal to one fourth of the pension he should have received.
The INPS dismissed S.B.’s application. Consequently, in 2002, S.B. lodged a claim with the Bergamo Tribunal (the body responsible for labour and social security disputes), contending that that was contrary to the spirit of the Italo-Swiss Convention.
On 7 February 2003, the Bergamo Tribunal upheld S.B.’s claim and ordered the INPS to recalculate S.B.’s pension.
Following an appeal by the INPS, on 11 December 2003, the Brescia Court of Appeal reversed the first-instance judgment.
When the relevant proceedings before the Court of Cassation were pending, Law no. 296 of 27 December 2006 (“Law no. 296/2006”) entered into force on 1 January 2007.
S.B. died on 19 January 2006.
On 11 December 2008, in view of the entry into force of Law no. 296/2006, the Court of Cassation dismissed with final effect S.B.’s appeal against the Brescia Court of Appeal’s judgment.
The relevant domestic law and practice concerning the case are to be found in Maggio and Others (cited above, §§ 27-35) and in Stefanetti and Others (merits) (cited above, §§ 13-27).
The relevant Articles of the Code of Civil Procedure (CCP), in the relevant parts thereof, read:
Article 110 – Legal succession in respect of proceedings (Successione nel processo)
If a party to an action [is unable to further participate in that action] owing to [his or her] death or for another reason, the proceedings [in question] are continued by his universal successor ...
Article 299 – Party’s death or loss or capacity prior to appearing before a judge (Morte o perdita della capacità prima della costituzione)
If, before joining the proceedings before the registry or before the judge in charge of the preparation of the proceedings in question, one of the parties or his legal representative dies ..., the proceedings shall be interrupted ...
Article 300 – Death or loss of capacity on the part of a party appearing before a judge or by a party that fails to appear (Morte o perdita della capacità della parte costituita o del contumace)
If any of the events described in the previous Article arises in respect of a party who has joined the proceedings while represented by his lawyer, the latter declares the occurrence of that event at the hearing or notifies the other parties thereof. The proceedings shall be interrupted from the time of such a declaration or notification ... Should the party who joined the proceedings be unrepresented, the proceedings shall be interrupted from the time of the [occurrence of the] event [in question]. ....
In several judgments (for example, Court of Cassation judgments nos. 1383 of 1998, 5755 of 1999, and 5626 of 2002), the Court of Cassation has maintained that (by contrast with proceedings pending before lower civil courts) proceedings before it are characterised by a specific process that does not depend on the activities of the parties. Proceedings before the Court of Cassation are in fact uniquely aimed at the solution of legal questions to which only the lawyer of the party in question, and not the party, can make his or her technical contribution (contributo tecnico) (Court of Cassation judgment no. 20004 of 2005). The permissible grounds set out Articles 299 and 300 of the CCP for interrupting legal proceedings are therefore not applicable to proceedings before the Court of Cassation. By implication, as a general principle, all the consequences of the trial – as well as all the other legal relationships of the deceased – pass on the heirs.
In the event that heirs wish to participate in proceedings in place of the deceased, they cannot formally join those proceedings (comparsa di costituzione), but they can simply lodge an application to become an intervener (atto di intervento o ricorso) (see, for example, Court of Cassation judgment no. 4233 of 2007).