The case originated in an application (no. 71256/11) against Hungary lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by six Hungarian nationals, Mr László Haraszthy, Mr György László Márton, Mr Gábor Horn, Ms Nóra Siska, Mr Zoltán Pintér and Ms  Mária  Terézia  Oszter (“the applicants”), on 11 November 2011.
The applicants were represented by Mr I. P. Horváth, a lawyer practising in Budapest. The Hungarian Government (“the Government”) were represented by Mr Z. Tallódi, Agent, Ministry of Justice.
On 31 August 2015 the applicants’ complaints under Article 1 of Protocol No. 1 to the Convention concerning the imposition of 98% tax on their severance payment were communicated to the Government.
.  On 9 November 2015 and 4 January 2016 the Court received friendly settlement declarations signed by the Government and by five applicants under which these five applicants agreed to waive any further claims against Hungary in respect of the facts giving rise to their complaints against an undertaking by the Government to pay Mr László Haraszthy EUR 12,800 (twelve thousand eight hundred euros), Mr Görgy László Márton EUR 3,200 (three thousand two hundred euros), Mr Gábor Horn EUR 1,000 (one thousand euros), Ms Nóra Siska EUR 5,300 (five thousand three hundred euros) and Mr Zoltán Pintér EUR 7,100 (seven thousand one hundred euros) to cover any pecuniary and non-pecuniary damage as well as costs and expenses, which will be converted into Hungarian forints at the rate applicable on the date of payment, and will be free of any taxes that may be applicable. It will be payable within three months from the date of notification of the decision taken by the Court. In the event of failure to pay this sum within the said three-month period, the Government undertook to pay simple interest on it, from the expiry of that period until settlement, at a rate equal to the marginal lending rate of the European Central Bank during the default period plus three percentage points. The payment will constitute the final resolution of the case in respect of these five applicants.
The sixth applicant, Ms Mária Terézia Oszter was born in 1949 and lives in Budakeszi. From 1 July 1997 she was employed at the State-owned National Asset Management Ltd. Her employment was terminated on 30 May 2011. A certain part of her severance payment was subject to special tax at a 98% rate. Accordingly, special tax was levied on her severance payment in the amount of HUF 2,195,835 (approximately EUR 7,300).