The applicant company complained that its right of access to court had been breached and that the excessively lengthy seizure of its property had constituted a penalty and a breach of its right to peaceful enjoyment of possessions in the absence of an effective domestic remedy.
The applicant company is based in Bucharest and was represented by Mr A. Morărescu, a lawyer practising in Bucharest. By a letter dated 23 July 2019, he notified the Court that the applicant company had changed its name to Credit Europe Asset Management S.A. The Court advised the parties on 21 August 2019 that it would continue processing the application under the case name of Credit Europe Leasing Ifn S.A. v. Romania.
The Government were represented by their Agent, most recently Ms S.-M. Teodoroiu, of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs.
The facts of the case, as submitted by the parties, may be summarised as follows.
On 6 July 2005 a finance lease contract was concluded between the applicant company, as financier, and company S.C., as user, represented by its administrator, Mr H.A. Under this contract, a truck bought by the applicant company was rented to S.C. in exchange for a monthly rent and an undertaking by S.C. to buy it at the end of the contract.
On 13 September 2006 the truck was sold by S.C. to the Stateowned press distribution company R.
On 8 September 2006 a finance lease contract was concluded between the applicant company as financier and S.C. as user, represented by Mr H.A. Under this contract, 213 metal kiosks owned by the applicant company were rented to S.C. for eighty-four months in exchange for a monthly rent and an undertaking by S.C. to buy the kiosks at the end of that period. The value of the kiosks was set at 856,250 euros (EUR) excluding tax.
On 27 October 2006, 15 February and 23 April 2008 three more similar contracts were concluded between the same parties for the same period, for 500 metal kiosks (valued at EUR 2,500,000 excluding tax), 100 metal kiosks (valued at EUR 600,000 excluding tax) and twenty metal kiosks (valued at EUR 122,000 excluding tax) respectively.
These finance lease contracts provided that the applicant company had paid the supplier, company T., the price for the kiosks, and was ceding their use to the user (company S.C.), for the entire period in which the latter fulfilled its obligation to pay the rent. The contracts further provided that, at the end of the leasing period, and only if the user fulfilled all contractual obligations, the applicant company would transfer ownership of the goods to it.
On 22 October 2007 a finance lease contract was concluded between the applicant company as financier and S.C. as user, represented by Mr H.A. Under this contract, six vans owned by the applicant company were rented to S.C. for sixty months in exchange for a monthly rent and an undertaking by S.C. to buy the vans at the end of that period.
On 9 November 2009, because S.C. failed to fulfill its obligations, the applicant company notified it that the above-mentioned contracts had been terminated and that the truck, kiosks and vans should all be returned.
In November and December 2009 S.C. sold a number of kiosks, including the kiosks under the above-mentioned lease contracts, to company E. Some of these kiosks were then sold on by E. to another company.
Between August and October 2010 forty-nine of the abovementioned kiosks were also sold by the applicant company to other commercial companies.
On 17 June 2010 an ongoing criminal investigation – started by the Directorate for Investigating Organised Crime and Terrorism (hereinafter, “the DIICOT”) of the prosecutor’s office attached to the High Court of Cassation and Justice and involving numerous individuals and commercial companies – was extended to Mr H.A., the administrator of S.C. (see paragraphs 5, 7 and 10 above). He was accused of fraud and money laundering in the context of the privatisation of the State-owned press distribution company R. (see paragraph 6 above). According to the prosecutors, between January 2004 and December 2009 the suspects had formed an organised criminal group and caused millions of euros in losses to the budget of the State-owned company. In July 2010 the investigation was extended to tax evasion.
According to a decision issued by the DIICOT on 22 June 2010 several commercial companies, including T. (see paragraph 9 above) and other companies in which Mr H.A. was associate or administrator, were included in the proceedings as parties liable under civil law for the damage caused by the offences under investigation. By the same decision, the prosecutor noted that the proceeds of the crimes under investigation had not yet been recovered and ordered the seizure of all movable and immovable assets belonging to these companies and Mr H.A, pursuant to Article 25 of Law no. 656/2002 on the prevention and sanctioning of money laundering, Article 13 of Law no. 39/2003 on combating organised crime and Article 163 of the former Code of Criminal Procedure (hereinafter “the old CCP” – see, respectively, paragraphs 37, 38 and 33 below). In the enforcement of this decision, on 24 and 25 June 2010 a number of vans and other vehicles used for the distribution of print media were seized from premises belonging to one of the commercial companies listed in the decision. The report drafted on that occasion by the police mentioned among the seized items the six vans belonging to the applicant company (see paragraph 10 above).
On 29 October 2010 the DIICOT ordered the seizure of all kiosks in the possession of N. (former company R., see paragraphs 6 and 14 above), a company in which Mr H.A. and other accused had shares. The measure, based on Article 163 of the old CCP read in conjunction with Articles 241, 25(1) and 25(6) of Law no. 656/2002 (see, respectively, paragraphs 33 and 37 below), was taken in order to secure subsequent special confiscation justified by the need to recover the proceeds of crime and to guarantee payment of the fine applied.
On 1 November 2010, in the enforcement of the abovementioned decision, some 1,483 kiosks were seized from premises belonging to N. According to a report drafted on that occasion by the police in the presence of the administrator and an employee representative of N., the value of the seized assets was EUR 2,859,000. The administrator of N. was appointed custodian of the seized assets. He was warned that the seized assets could not be altered, destroyed or assigned for any other purpose, as stipulated by Article 244 of the Criminal Code. The representatives of N. signed the report without objections.
On 23 November 2010 the applicant company lodged a complaint with the hierarchically superior prosecutor against the DIICOT’s decision of 29 October 2010 (see paragraph 16 above). It explained that some of the kiosks seized by that decision were its property and submitted as proof copies of the purchase contracts and finance lease contracts. It claimed that the seizure had been unlawful as it was not party to the criminal investigation and requested the lifting of the measure as regards the kiosks belonging to it.
On 14 December 2010 the chief prosecutor of the DIICOT rejected the complaint as unfounded, holding that the legal framework governing the crimes under investigation and the preventive measures applied allowed for the seizure of assets from any third party for the purpose of subsequent special confiscation. It was further noted that the seizure of assets belonging to third parties was triggered by the nature of the crime of money laundering. In the specific circumstances of the case, the prosecutor explained that the measure was justified for several reasons: the proceeds of crime had not been recovered, the accused were shareholders of N. and there was a risk that assets belonging to it would be alienated, and also, the accused had put in place a fictitious circuit of money and assets, more specifically the kiosks in question, according to which N. became the final beneficiary of the lease contracts since both companies – N. and S.C. – were controlled by the same accused.
On 17 February 2011 the complaint lodged by the applicant company with the Bucharest County Court against the DIICOT’s decision of 29 October 2010 (see paragraph 16 above) was rejected as inadmissible. The court held that Article 168 of the old CCP, as interpreted by decision no. 71/2007 of the High Court of Cassation and Justice (see paragraphs 33 and 34 below), provided that any complaint under that provision had to be decided by the prosecutor if the criminal investigation was still pending, and by the court if the trial had started in the case. The court therefore concluded that the present complaint was inadmissible since it related to a case in which the investigation was still pending and which had not been brought before the courts. The decision was final.
On 24 February 2011 the applicant company lodged a petition with the DIICOT requesting, as owner of 827 of the kiosks seized, to be appointed custodian of these kiosks.
On 6 February 2012 the applicant company lodged a complaint with the DIICOT requesting the lifting of the seizure applied to its six vans (see paragraphs 10 and 16 in fine above).
On 12 September 2012 the applicant company, represented by a lawyer, lodged a new request with the DIICOT for the annulment of the seizure decision of 29 October 2010 (see paragraph 16 above). It clarified that it owned 779 of the 1,483 kiosks seized by the contested decision. It claimed that maintaining the measure breached its right to property, as guaranteed by the Constitution and Article 1 of Protocol No. 1 to the Convention. It also argued that the seizure had been unlawful since Article 163 §§ 2 and 3 of the old CCP (see paragraph 33 below) provided for the seizure of assets only from the suspect or accused, and none of the situations listed in Article 118 of the Criminal Code (see paragraph 38 below) were applicable in its case. In its opinion, the measure had also been unnecessary since the purpose of this type of measure was to prevent the suspect, accused or party liable under civil law from selling its assets or going bankrupt. However, the seizure decision did not refer to any specific fact necessitating the adoption of such a measure in respect of assets belonging to a third party to the criminal proceedings, such as itself. Lastly, the applicant company argued that the seizure of its assets had prevented it from using its property and had caused it a loss of EUR 387,352 excluding tax, as calculated by a financial expert.
On 14 May 2015 the applicant company reiterated its complaints in connection with the seizure of the 779 kiosks, six vans and one truck, seeking the lifting of the measure and compensation for losses incurred to date. It submitted a similar request on 19 January 2016.
No reply was received by the applicant company to the abovementioned requests.
On 16 March 2018, at the request of company N., acting as owner of all the seized assets (see paragraph 16 above), the DIICOT decided to lift the seizure in respect of 1,390 kiosks. The prosecutor observed that in previous proceedings before the courts all sales contracts concluded by S.C. concerning the kiosks (see paragraph 12 above) had been annulled and the assets returned to N., therefore the reasons on which the seizure measure had been based were no longer valid. This decision was communicated to N.
On 21 November 2018 the applicant company lodged a new request for the lifting of the seizure and the return of the 779 kiosks, six vans and one truck. It also sought compensation for the losses incurred due to the seizure.
This request was partially allowed by the DIICOT in a decision adopted on 6 March 2019. The decision stated that on 16 March 2018 the seizure had already been lifted as regards 1,390 kiosks, following a request submitted by the injured party, N. (see paragraph 26 above). However, that decision had failed to identify the kiosks concerned and so, to date, there were still ninety-three kiosks formally seized. Therefore, since the reasons for the lifting of the measure applied to all the kiosks, it was decided to lift the measure as regards the remaining ninety-three kiosks and to reject the applicant company’s request for the remaining kiosks as being devoid of purpose. As regards the six vans, noting that the applicant company had notified S.C. of the termination of the lease contract, the prosecutor considered that they had remained the applicant company’s property and decided to lift the seizure, ordering their return to the applicant company. Since there was evidence indicating that the truck had been sold (see paragraph 6 above) and then sublet by S.C., the prosecutor considered that further verifications were necessary and decided to examine the request concerning the truck separately in a future decision. With respect to the applicant company’s request for compensation for losses incurred, the prosecutor decided that such a request was not within the competence of the prosecutor’s office.
This decision was communicated to the applicant company and received at its office on 13 March 2019.
On 4 April 2019 the applicant company contested the decisions of 16 March 2018 and 6 March 2019 (see paragraphs 26 and 28 above) before the chief prosecutor of the DIICOT. It claimed that the lifting of the seizure had been a mere formality since the assets concerned were not in its possession, had not been identified and had not been returned to it in the authorities’ presence. It further requested that the ninety-three kiosks and six vans be identified, their depreciation due to use be valued by the prosecutor and possession of the goods be restored in the authorities’ presence. It also contested the prosecutor’s decision as regards the truck, which, in its opinion, was in the same situation as the kiosks and vans. It requested that the seizure be lifted, that the truck be identified and that possession of the truck be restored under the authorities’ supervision. Furthermore, it alleged that the prosecutor had wrongly rejected its complaint against the seizure of the 779 kiosks, since the decision of 16 March 2018 had ordered the lifting of the seizure in favour of N. and had not even been communicated to the applicant company. The latter also contested the rejection of its claim for compensation. In this connection, it submitted that the assets seized had been used for the benefit of N. and considered that the benefits generated by their use should be returned to it as rightful owner. In conclusion, the applicant company requested the annulment of the decisions of 16 March 2018 and 6 March 2019, the lifting of the seizure in respect of the 779 kiosks, six vans and one truck, their identification and valuation and restoration of possession in the authorities’ presence.
By a decision adopted on 3 May 2019 the chief prosecutor of the DIICOT rejected the applicant company’s complaint as illfounded, maintaining the arguments of the 6 March 2019 decision (see paragraph 28 above) and observing that none of the kiosks were currently seized. No mention was made of the applicant company’s request for the identification, valuation and restoration of possession of the seized assets. This decision was communicated to the applicant company on 10 May 2019.
At the time of the latest information available to the Court (11 November 2019), the criminal investigation was still ongoing at the DIICOT.
The relevant provisions of the old CCP, in force between 30 April 1997 and 31 January 2014, read as follows at the relevant time:
Article 163 – Preventive measures (Măsurile asigurătorii)
“(1) Preventive measures are taken during the criminal proceedings by the prosecutor or by the court and consist of freezing, by means of seizure, movable and immovable property, with a view to securing special confiscation, to recover damage caused by an offence, as well as to guarantee the payment of a fine.
(2) Preventive measures aimed at recovering damage [caused by an offence] may be taken in respect of assets belonging to the suspect, accused or party liable under civil law, up to the maximum value of the damage.
(3) Preventive measures aimed at guaranteeing the payment of a fine shall be taken only in respect of assets belonging to the suspect or accused.”
Article 165 – Procedure for seizure
“(1) The body responsible for enforcing the seizure shall identify and value the seized assets, and may, if need be, have recourse to experts.
...
(7) Seized assets shall be kept until the seizure is lifted.
...
(9) If there is a risk of alienation, the other seized movable assets (other than money, precious metals or perishable items) shall be sealed or taken away, and a custodian may be appointed.”
Article 168 – Complaints against preventive measures
“(1) The suspect, accused, party liable under civil law and any other interested person may lodge a complaint with the prosecutor or the court, at any stage of the criminal proceedings.”
The provisions of Article 168 of the old CCP were clarified in an appeal on points of law by the High Court of Cassation and Justice, which held (in decision no. 71/2007) that a seizure could only be contested before the prosecutor while the investigation was ongoing, and before the courts once the investigation had been concluded and the case sent to trial.
On 1 February 2014 a new Code of Criminal Procedure (“the new CCP”) entered into force, containing new provisions concerning preventive measures as follows:
Article 250 – Complaints against preventive measures
“(1) The suspect, accused and any other interested person may lodge a complaint with the court competent to decide on the merits of the case against the prosecutor’s decision to take a preventive measure within three days of its notification or the date of its enforcement.”
The relevant provisions of Law no. 656/2002 on the prevention and sanctioning of money laundering, in force at the relevant time, read as follows:
Article 241
“The adoption of preventive measures shall be compulsory in cases concerning money laundering or the financing of terrorism.”
Article 25
“(1) In cases concerning money laundering and the financing of terrorism, the provisions on confiscation set forth by Article 118 of the Criminal Code shall apply. ...
(6) In order to ensure confiscation, the application of the preventive measures provided for by the Code of Criminal Procedure shall be compulsory.”
Article 13 of Law no. 39/2003 on combating organised crime, in force at the relevant time, included provisions similar to those in Law no. 656/2002 mentioned above as regards the applicability of Article 118 of the Criminal Code to confiscation ordered for the offence of conspiracy to commit crime.
The Criminal Code in force at the relevant time provided as follows:
Article 118 – Special confiscation
“(1) The following shall be subject to special confiscation:
(a) assets produced through the commission of an offence;
(b) assets that have been used, in any way, in the commission of an offence, if they belong to the perpetrator or to another person who knew the purpose of their use;
 ...
(e) assets acquired through the commission of an offence, if they are not returned to the injured party and if they are not used to indemnify the injured party;”
Article 504 of the old CCP provided for the right to compensation for those who have been acquitted after a final conviction and those who had been unlawfully deprived of their liberty during the criminal proceedings. Article 504 § 3 provided that the unlawful deprivation of liberty had to be established by decision of the prosecutor or the court. The new CCP, in force after 1 February 2014, includes similar provisions in Articles 538 and 539 on the right to compensation for judicial error and unlawful detention. Under these provisions, a person who receives a final conviction has the right to be compensated for any damage suffered if the conviction has been overturned and a final decision for acquittal has been pronounced owing to a new or recently discovered fact that proves that the conviction was the result of a judicial error. A person unlawfully detained in the course of criminal proceedings has the same right.
Articles 998 and 999 of the former Civil Code, in force until 30 September 2011, provided that any person who had suffered damage could seek redress by bringing a civil action against the person who had intentionally or negligently caused it. In order for the action to be admitted, the interested party had to prove in court that the defendant had committed an illicit act with liability under civil law, that the plaintiff had sustained damage, and that there was a causal link between the illicit act and the damage sustained. Similar provisions were included in Article 1349 of the new Civil Code, in force after 1 October 2011.
The Government submitted numerous judgments adopted by the domestic courts in cases in which third parties to the criminal investigation contested the seizure of their assets ordered by the prosecutor during the investigation. All these judgments were adopted in cases in which the criminal investigation had finished and the defendants had been sent to trial, or in cases concerning measures ordered after the entry into force of the new CCP.
In one judgment of 21 September 2016 the domestic court examined on the merits and rejected as ill-founded a complaint lodged by a third party to the investigation against the seizure ordered by the prosecutor on 1 February 2011, before the entry into force of the new CCP. It appears from this judgment that the criminal investigation had finished and that the defendant had been sent to trial at the time the complaint was lodged.
The Government also submitted a judgment adopted by the High Court of Cassation and Justice on 30 January 2014 concerning a claim for compensation for damage incurred as a result of alleged unlawful detention, abusive investigation and several preventive or other measures adopted during the investigation against the plaintiff. The plaintiff in this case (an ex-customs officer and former member of parliament) had been placed in pre-trial detention for several months during the criminal investigation and then convicted by a court. Subsequently, his conviction had been overturned, the criminal investigation reopened and the charges against him dropped. In whole the proceedings against him lasted eleven years and ended with the prosecutor’s decision to close the investigation as he had committed no crime. Under Articles 504 and 505 of the former CCP concerning the right to compensation for unlawful conviction and deprivation of liberty (see paragraph 39 above) and the general tort provisions in Articles 998 and 999 of the former Civil Code (see paragraph 40 above), the court awarded the plaintiff compensation for non-pecuniary damage. The court established that the plaintiff first had been held in pre-trial detention but subsequently had not been brought before a court and had had the charges against him dropped. This was considered by the court to be a judicial error giving rise to the right to compensation. The court awarded compensation for a number of measures adopted by the prosecutor during the investigation and their excessive duration. These measures included the pre-trial detention and seizure of the plaintiff’s car.
The Government also referred to decision no. 20 of 19 January 2016, in which the Constitutional Court held that the provisions of the CCP concerning preventive measures ordered by criminal bodies and, more specifically, the lifting of preventive measures, had to be supplemented by the provisions of the Code of Civil Procedure. The Constitutional Court explained that Article 957 § 1 of the Code of Civil Procedure provided for the possibility of requesting the lifting of the seizure if a sufficient real or personal guarantee was given by the debtor. Accordingly, in criminal matters, a suspect or defendant whose assets had been seized could, during the criminal proceedings, request the lifting of the measure if he or she offered a sufficient guarantee, made a deposit covering the entire value of the debt or paid the entire debt.