The case originated in an application (no. 48829/06) against the Republic of Moldova lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Moldovan national, Mr Andrei Gumeniuc (“the applicant”), on 27 October 2006.
The applicant was represented by Mr O.L. Dovbysh, a lawyer practising in Vinnytsya, Ukraine. The Moldovan Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Mr L. Apostol.
The applicant alleged, in particular, that he had been subjected to detention in breach of the provisions of Article 5 § 1 of the Convention.
On 19 November 2014 the complaint concerning Article 5 § 1 was communicated to the Government and the remainder of the application was declared inadmissible pursuant to Rule 54 § 3 of the Rules of Court.
The applicant was born in 1978 and lives in Calaraseuca.
On 27 July 2005 the applicant was stopped by the traffic police for speeding.
By an order of 5 September 2005 the traffic police fined the applicant 60 Moldovan lei (MDL) (the equivalent of some 4 euros (EUR) at the time). The applicant did not challenge the police order.
As the applicant failed to pay the fine, on an unspecified date a bailiff applied to the Ocnita District Court to have the fine converted into thirty days’ administrative detention, under Article 26 § 5 of the Code of Administrative Offences (see paragraph 14 below). According to the bailiff, the applicant had been ordered to pay the fine by 28 February 2006; however, he had failed to do so and had thus acted in bad faith.
On 26 May 2006, at a hearing conducted without the presence of the parties, the Ocnita District Court accepted the bailiff’s request and ordered the applicant’s administrative detention for a period of thirty days. The document constituting the court’s decision was a pre-printed template which the judge had completed by hand with the specific details of the case, such as the names of the judge, the applicant and the bailiff, the relevant dates, the amount of the fine, the applicant’s address and the number of days of detention to be served by the applicant. It did not contain any indication that the applicant had been summoned to appear at the hearing.
At 8 a.m. on 12 June 2006 the applicant was arrested at home and placed in detention. At about 5 p.m. the same day he suffered a heart attack and was taken by ambulance to a hospital. He recovered shortly thereafter and was soon discharged from hospital.
On 16 June 2006 the applicant lodged an appeal against the Ocnita District Court’s decision of 26 May 2006, arguing, inter alia, that he had not been summoned to appear at the hearing of 26 May 2006, that he had had no knowledge of the decision of 26 May 2006 prior to his arrest, and that he had not been given a chance to contest the court’s decision before being placed in detention. The applicant also argued that the traffic police’s order of 5 September 2005 imposing a fine on him for speeding had been abusive because the police had no evidence to prove that it had been his car which had been caught speeding and not other cars on the road.
On 30 August 2006 the Balti Court of Appeal dismissed the applicant’s appeal, finding that the applicant had not challenged the traffic police’s order of 5 September 2005 within the statutory time-limit. The Court of Appeal did not respond to the applicant’s argument about the failure to summon him to the hearing of 26 May 2006.
It does not appear from the materials of the case that the applicant served the rest of the detention term.
Under Article 26 (5) of the Code of Administrative Offences, in force at the material time, any person who failed to pay an administrative fine in bad faith was liable to have the fine converted into administrative detention. The duration of the detention was ten days for every 20 MDL but no longer than thirty days. Once such a measure had been adopted, it could not be revoked upon payment of the fine. It could only be revoked by the hierarchically superior court if an appeal against it was successful.