The case originated in an application (no. 648/02) against the  lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Polish national, Mr Damian Urbanowicz (“the applicant”), on 10 November 2005.
The Polish Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Mr J. Wołąsiewicz of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs.
The applicant complained, in particular, that he had been deprived of access to the Supreme Court.
On 21 September 2009 the President of the Fourth Section decided to give notice of this complaint to the Government. Under Article 29 § 3 of the Convention it was decided to examine the admissibility and merits of the case at the same time.
In accordance with Protocol No. 14, the application was allocated to a Committee.
The Government objected to the examination of the application by a Committee. After having considered the Government's objection, the Court rejects it.
The applicant was born in 1981.
On 28 January 2004 the  convicted the applicant of murder and sentenced him to 25 years' imprisonment as a recidivist offender. The applicant appealed. On 14 April 2005 the Lublin Court of Appeal upheld the first-instance judgment. On the same day the applicant's lawyer, who represented him under the legal-aid scheme, requested the court to prepare written grounds for the judgment of the appellate court and stated that this request should be regarded as an announcement of an upcoming cassation appeal against it.
On 25 April 2005 the same lawyer requested the court to release him from the obligation to represent the applicant since the applicant had announced that he had lost confidence in him.
On 19 May 2005 the applicant lodged with the Lublin Court of Appeal a motion to have a new legal-aid lawyer assigned to the case. On 13 June 2005 the court allowed his request, assigned Mr J. Ż. to represent the applicant and ordered the registry to serve the written grounds of the judgment of 14 April 2005 on the lawyer.
The lawyer was served with the grounds on 20 June 2005.
In a letter to the applicant, dated 14 July 2005 the Lublin Court of Appeal informed the applicant that Mr J. Ż. had found no grounds on which to prepare a cassation appeal. The relevant passage of the letter read as follows:
“I inform you that the legal-aid lawyer assigned to prepare a cassation appeal against the ... judgment of 14 April 3005, advocate Mr J. Ż. submitted a letter to the court that he had found no grounds, stipulated in Article 523 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, on which to prepare a cassation appeal in the present case. Accordingly, I am obliged to inform you that Article 84 of that Code confers on a defence counsel a right to issue such an opinion and that no regulations are available which would empower the court to compel a legal-aid lawyer to prepare a cassation appeal ... Therefore the Court of appeal will abstain from taking any further measures in the present case, having found that the convicted person's defence rights were properly guaranteed through legal-aid assistance having been granted in the case.”
The relevant domestic law and practice concerning the procedure for lodging cassation appeals with the Supreme Court against judgments of the appellate courts are stated in the Court's judgments in the cases of Kulikowski v. Poland, no. 18353/03, §§ 19-27, ECHR 2009... (extracts) and Antonicelli v. Poland, no. 2815/05, §§ 14-22, 19 May 2009).
In particular, on 26 February 2002 the Supreme Court examined a situation where a legalaid lawyer had refused to represent a convicted person for the purposes of cassation proceedings, finding that a cassation appeal would offer no prospects of success. It held that in such a situation the appellate court was obliged to instruct the defendant that the timelimit for lodging a cassation appeal started to run only on the date on which the defendant was served with the lawyer's refusal and not on the earlier date when the judgment of the appellate court was served on the defendant himself. It stated that it was not open to doubt that a defendant faced with a legal-aid lawyer's refusal had the right to take other measures to seek legal assistance necessary for effective lodging of a cassation appeal (III KZ 87/01). The Supreme Court reiterated its position in a decision of 6 May 2008 and in a number of similar decisions given in 2008. It observed that there had been certain discrepancies in the judicial practice as to the manner in which the time-limit in such situations was calculated, but the strand of the case-law launched by the decision given in February 2002 was both dominant and correct, and also accepted by doctrine as providing to defendants adequate procedural guarantees of access to the Supreme Court within a reasonable time frame (II KZ 16/08).
In its decision of 25 March 1998 the Supreme Court stated that the refusal of a legal-aid lawyer to lodge a cassation appeal did not constitute a valid ground for granting retrospective leave to lodge such an appeal by another lawyer out of time (V KZ 12/98). It confirmed this ruling in a further decision of 1 December 1999. The Supreme Court observed that the court could only assign a new legal-aid lawyer to the case if it were shown that the first lawyer had been negligent in his or her task of assessing whether a cassation appeal had any prospects of success. If this were not the case, a court was not obliged to assign a new legal-aid lawyer to represent the convicted person and its refusal was not subject to appeal (III KZ 139/99). The Supreme Court reiterated its position in a number of other decisions (e.g. II KZ 11/02, II KZ 36/02).