The case originated in an application (no. 12778/17) against the Republic of Turkey lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Turkish national, Mr Alparslan Altan (“the applicant”), on 16 January 2017.
The applicant was represented by Mr E.Y. Aras, a lawyer practising in Ankara. The Turkish Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent.
The applicant alleged, in particular, that he had been deprived of his liberty in breach of Article 5 of the Convention.
On 29 September 2017 notice of the complaints concerning Article 5 §§ 1 and 3 was given to the Government and the remainder of the application was declared inadmissible pursuant to Rule 54 § 3 of the Rules of Court. The applicant and the Government each filed observations on the admissibility and merits of the case.
Ayşe Işıl Karakaş, the judge elected in respect of Turkey, withdrew from sitting in the case (Rule 28). Harun Mert was accordingly appointed by the President to sit as an ad hoc judge (Article 26 § 4 of the Convention and Rule 29 § 1).
The applicant, a former member of the Turkish Constitutional Court, is a Turkish national who was born in 1968 and lives in Ankara. He is currently detained.
In 1993 the applicant began his career as a public prosecutor. In 2001 he was appointed as a rapporteur at the Constitutional Court. On 27 March 2010 he was appointed by the President of Turkey as a judge of the Constitutional Court for a term of office due to expire when he reached the age of 65. On 26 October 2011 he was elected Vice-President of the Constitutional Court (Anayasa Mahkemesi Başkanvekili) by the court’s judges for a four-year term, which ended on 26 October 2015. At the time of the events to which the application relates, he was a judge at the court.
During the night of 15 to 16 July 2016 a group of members of the Turkish armed forces calling themselves the “Peace at Home Council” attempted to carry out a military coup aimed at overthrowing the democratically installed parliament, government and President of Turkey.
During the attempted coup, soldiers under the instigators’ control bombarded several strategic State buildings, including the parliament building and the presidential compound, attacked the hotel where the President was staying, held the Chief of General Staff hostage, also attacked television channels and fired shots at demonstrators. During the night of violence, more than 250 people were killed and more than 2,500 were injured.
The day after the attempted military coup, the national authorities blamed the network linked to Fetullah Gülen, a Turkish citizen living in Pennsylvania (United States of America) and considered to be the leader of an organisation known as FETÖ/PDY (“Gülenist Terror Organisation/Parallel State Structure”). Several criminal investigations were subsequently initiated by the appropriate prosecuting authorities in respect of suspected members of that organisation.
On 20 July 2016 the government declared a state of emergency for a period of three months as from 21 July 2016; the state of emergency was subsequently extended for further periods of three months by the Council of Ministers, chaired by the President.
On 21 July 2016 the Turkish authorities gave notice to the Secretary General of the Council of Europe of a derogation from the Convention under Article 15.
During the state of emergency, the Council of Ministers, chaired by the President, passed thirty-seven legislative decrees (nos. 667-703) under Article 121 of the Constitution. One of them, Legislative Decree no. 667, published in the Official Gazette on 23 July 2016, provided in Article 3 that the Constitutional Court was authorised to dismiss any of its members who were considered to belong or be affiliated or linked to terrorist organisations or organisations, structures or groups found by the National Security Council to have engaged in activities harmful to national security. The legislative decrees also placed significant restrictions on the procedural safeguards laid down in domestic law for anyone held in police custody or pre-trial detention (for example, extension of the police custody period, and restrictions on access to case files and on the examination of objections against detention orders).
The Government stated that during and after the coup attempt, prosecutors’ offices had initiated criminal investigations in respect of individuals involved in the attempt and those who were not involved but had links to the FETÖ/PDY organisation, including members of the judiciary. They specified in that connection that on 16 July 2016, in the context of a criminal investigation opened by the Ankara public prosecutor’s office, some 3,000 judges and prosecutors, including two judges of the Constitutional Court (including the applicant) and more than 160 judges of the Court of Cassation and the Supreme Administrative Court, had been taken into police custody and subsequently placed in pre-trial detention. In addition, warrants had been issued for the arrest of thirty judges of the highest courts who were deemed to be fugitives.
On 18 July 2018 the state of emergency was lifted.
On 16 July 2016, in the course of the criminal investigation opened by the Ankara public prosecutor’s office (see paragraph 14 above), the applicant was arrested and taken into police custody on the instructions of the same office, which described him as a member of the FETÖ/PDY terrorist organisation and urged that he be placed in pre-trial detention. The relevant parts of the instructions were worded as follows:
“The offence of overthrowing the Government and the constitutional order through force and violence is currently being committed across the country; there is a risk that members of the [FETÖ/PDY] terrorist organisation committing the offence in question might flee the country ...”
On the same day, the police conducted a search of the applicant’s home and seized computers and other IT equipment belonging to him.
On 19 July 2016 the applicant was questioned by the Ankara public prosecutor. He was suspected of having sought to overthrow the constitutional order (Article 309 of the Criminal Code) and being a member of the FETÖ/PDY terrorist organisation (Article 314 of the Criminal Code). During the questioning, the applicant, who was assisted by a lawyer, denied all the allegations against him and argued that they could only have been based on his dissenting opinions as set out in judgments of the Constitutional Court. His lawyer challenged the applicant’s detention in police custody, arguing that the requirements of a case of discovery in flagrante delicto were not satisfied and that his client could not be the subject of a criminal investigation without permission from the Constitutional Court. He requested that his client be released on bail.
Later that day, the Ankara public prosecutor’s office ordered the applicant, together with thirteen other suspects – six judges of the Supreme Administrative Court, six judges of the Court of Cassation and another judge – to appear before the 2nd Magistrate’s Court (sulh ceza hakimliǧi). He called for the applicant to be placed in pre-trial detention, bearing in mind that certain members of the FETÖ/PDY organisation had fled after the events and that evidence had yet to be gathered.
On 20 July 2016 the applicant, assisted by his lawyer, Mr M. Orak, appeared before the 2nd Magistrate’s Court with the thirteen other suspects. According to the record of the questioning, they were suspected of attempting to overthrow the constitutional order and being members of the FETÖ/PDY organisation, offences punishable under Articles 309 and 314 of the Criminal Code. The suspects’ statements, including those made by the applicant, were recorded using the SEGBİS sound and image information system (Ses ve Görüntü Bilişim Sistemi). The transcripts of the recordings indicate that the applicant, after describing his career as a judge at the Constitutional Court, denied all the accusations against him. They also show that his lawyer challenged all the measures taken against his client, relying on the latter’s special status linked to his position as a Constitutional Court judge. The relevant parts of the transcripts read as follows:
“The suspect’s lawyer, Mr M. Orak: ‘... it appears that Articles 109 and 114 [this in fact refers to Articles 309 and 314 of the Criminal Code] were mentioned in the record of the hearing; is the request for detention under Article 114 [314] also being made on the basis of Article 109 [309]?’
The magistrate, M.C.: ‘Not [on the basis of Article] 109 [309].’
The suspect’s lawyer, Mr M. Orak: ‘OK ... Since my client has been brought before you on the basis of Article 114 [314], this is not a case of discovery in flagrante delicto. So all the steps taken in connection with that offence have been ultra vires and unlawful ... In this case, the criminal investigation and trial should be conducted from the start by the plenary Constitutional Court ... There is no concrete evidence that could justify pre-trial detention, and the accusations were based on abstract allegations ... [Furthermore], in this particular case, the cumulative conditions for pre-trial detention were not met, and in any event, we are asking for alternative measures to be ordered ...”
On the same day, the magistrate ordered the pre-trial detention of the applicant and the thirteen other suspects, holding as follows:
“... In view of the fact that some suspects and their representatives contended that the Ankara public prosecutor’s office and our court did not have jurisdiction [to deal with the case], it should be noted that in accordance with section 16(1) of Law no. 6216 ..., the criminal investigation was governed by the ordinary rules, given that the offence of which the suspects were accused, namely membership of an armed terrorist organisation, was a ‘continuing offence’ (temadi olan suç) and that there was a case of discovery in flagrante delicto.
Following an examination of the investigation file, the suspects’ pre-trial detention is ordered, regard being had to the nature of the alleged offence, the state of the evidence, [all the] records included in the file, the decisions of 17 July 2016 by the presidents’ offices at the Court of Cassation and the Supreme Administrative Court, the reports on searches and seizures and the entire contents of the case file, and also the fact that there is concrete evidence giving rise to a strong suspicion that the offence in question has been committed. [It is also noted that] the alleged offence was among the so-called ‘catalogue’ offences listed in Article 100 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, that pre-trial detention is a proportionate measure in view of the length of the sentence provided for by law, and that alternative measures to detention are insufficient on account of the risks of absconding and of damage to evidence.”
Also on 20 July 2016 the Government declared a state of emergency for a period of three months as from 21 July 2016; the state of emergency was subsequently extended for further periods of three months by the Council of Ministers, chaired by the President.
In addition, on 21 July 2016 the Turkish authorities gave notice to the Secretary General of the Council of Europe of a derogation from the Convention under Article 15 (see paragraphs 11-13 above).
On the same day, the applicant lodged an objection against the order for his pre-trial detention. In support of the objection, he argued that there was no concrete evidence that could justify detention, and that such a measure did not comply with the relevant domestic law. He also asked for alternative measures to be applied on the grounds that his son was severely disabled and dependent on his personal assistance.
In a decision of 4 August 2016 the Constitutional Court, meeting in plenary session, dismissed the applicant from his post. In reaching that decision it noted, on the basis of Article 3 of Legislative Decree no. 667, that “information from the social environment” (sosyal çevre bilgisi) and the “common opinion emerging over time” (zaman içinde oluşan ortak kanaatleri) among members of the Constitutional Court suggested that the applicant had links to the organisation in question, making him no longer fit to practise his profession.
On 9 August 2016 the 3rd Magistrate’s Court dismissed the applicant’s objection against the order for his detention.
On 26 September 2016 the applicant applied for release on bail. In support of his application, he repeated his argument that his detention did not comply with the relevant domestic law. He argued firstly that as he had not been accused of having taken part in the attempted coup, this was not a case of discovery in flagrante delicto. He further noted that the cases of in flagrante delicto were listed in Article 2 of the Code of Criminal Procedure (CCP) and that his own situation did not fall into any of those categories. In addition, he argued that the order for his detention did not contain any specific grounds relating to him and was not based on any fact justifying such a measure. Lastly, he again asked for alternative measures to be applied, referring to the health of his son, who was seriously disabled and dependent on his personal assistance.
On various other occasions, the applicant applied for release on bail. In decisions adopted on 7 November and 5 December 2016, in line with an earlier decision of 21 September 2016, the competent magistrates refused his applications.
In a letter dated 8 November 2017 the public prosecutor’s office at the Court of Cassation forwarded the case file to the 10th Criminal Division of the same court. On several occasions the Criminal Division reviewed whether it was necessary to keep the applicant in pre-trial detention and ordered the extension of his detention.
On 25 October 2017 the Ankara public prosecutor’s office submitted a summary report (fezleke) to the public prosecutor’s office at the Court of Cassation with a view to instituting criminal proceedings against the applicant. In the report it stated that the FETÖ/PDY organisation was the instigator of the attempted coup of 15 July 2016 and that a judicial investigation was being conducted in respect of judges deemed to be members of that structure and to have acted under its orders and instructions. The public prosecutor’s office pointed out that the risk of a coup had not been entirely eliminated and that a case of discovery in flagrante delicto was at issue, falling within the jurisdiction of the Assize Court; accordingly, a criminal investigation had been initiated in respect of the applicant on 16 July 2016 on the basis of the provisions of ordinary law. It noted that statements by anonymous witnesses and suspects, the content of communications between other individuals via the ByLock messaging service and information about signals from mobile telephones (see paragraphs 32-40 below) all showed that the applicant had committed the offence of membership of an armed terrorist organisation.
On 7 September 2016 the applicant lodged an individual application with the Constitutional Court. He complained that he had been arbitrarily arrested and placed in pre-trial detention, in breach of the relevant law, namely the Constitutional Court Act (Law no. 6216) and that court’s rules of procedure. He also alleged that there was no specific evidence giving rise to a reasonable suspicion that he had committed a criminal offence necessitating his pre-trial detention. Furthermore, he maintained that the domestic courts had not given sufficient reasons for the decisions ordering his detention. He argued in addition that he had been arrested and detained for reasons other than those provided for in the Constitution. He also complained that the magistrates who had ordered his pre-trial detention were not independent and impartial, and that the conditions of his detention were incompatible with the prohibition of inhuman and degrading treatment. In addition, he contended that his dismissal and the various measures taken against him had infringed his rights to a fair trial, to respect for his private life and home and to freedom of expression, and had constituted discrimination.
On 11 January 2018 the Constitutional Court gave a judgment (no. 2016/15586) in which it decided, unanimously, to reject the following complaints as manifestly ill-founded: the complaint concerning the lawfulness of the detention order and the lack of reasonable suspicion justifying it; the complaint concerning the alleged lack of independence and impartiality of the magistrates who had ordered the applicant’s pre-trial detention; and the complaints concerning the right to a fair trial, the right to respect for private life and the home and the prohibition of discrimination.
With regard to the complaint concerning the lawfulness of the applicant’s detention in police custody, the Constitutional Court held that he should have brought an action under Article 141 § 1 (a) of the CCP but had refrained from doing so. It found that the same applied to his complaints concerning his dismissal. Furthermore, it noted that there was no information in his application or the appended material as to whether the applicant had lodged an objection under Article 91 § 5 of the CCP against his detention in police custody. Accordingly, it declared these complaints inadmissible for failure to exhaust the appropriate remedies.
In its judgment the Constitutional Court, after describing the characteristics of the FETÖ/PDY organisation and its covert structure within the judiciary, first summarised the evidence gathered by the Ankara public prosecutor’s office (1) and then addressed the complaints concerning the lawfulness of the detention order and the alleged lack of reasonable suspicion justifying it (2).
According to the Constitutional Court’s judgment, the allegation that the applicant had knowingly joined the judicial branch of the FETÖ/PDY organisation was based on the following facts and evidence:
(a)  statements by anonymous witnesses;
(b)  statements by a suspect;
(c)  messages exchanged via ByLock; and
(d)  other facts.
The evidence can be summarised as follows.
An anonymous witness referred to as “Defne” made several statements to the Kahramanmaras and Ankara public prosecutors’ offices.
In her statements of 4 August 2016 the witness said the following:
“... I was appointed as a rapporteur at the Constitutional Court. While I was working at the Constitutional Court, we kept seeing friends who belonged to this structure [the FETÖ/PDY organisation] ... There, I noticed that certain files were monitored ... Some practices came to my notice; for instance, applications relating to the election threshold and the funding of political parties ... were monitored by the rapporteurs and members [of the Constitutional Court] belonging to the FETÖ/PDY organisation. After such applications were lodged, [these rapporteurs and members of the Constitutional Court] started to keep track of the cases by enquiring about their outcome. The ones monitoring these cases were Alparslan Altan, who was the mentor, and the chief rapporteurs belonging to this structure. I recall that Alparslan Altan would write a dissenting opinion whenever a decision was not adopted [along the lines] that he wanted.”
In her statement of 6 October 2016 the same witness said the following:
“On the basis of my own observations, the contacts I had while working at the Constitutional Court as a rapporteur, and the comments and behaviour of rapporteurs whom I know to be members of this structure, I can say that the former member and rapporteur of the Constitutional Court Alparslan Altan was a member of this cemaat [the term ‘cemaat’ literally means ‘community’; however, at the time of the events, the term was commonly used to denote followers of Fetullah Gülen, the presumed head of the FETÖ/PDY organisation – hereinafter ‘the cemaat’]. As in other judicial institutions there was a ‘secret cell’-type organisation within the Constitutional Court ...”
In a statement taken on 27 December 2016 another anonymous witness, referred to as “Kitapçı”, said the following:
“... When I started working at the Constitutional Court as a rapporteur, I was convinced that, given his social contacts, Alparslan Altan was a member of the cemaat. His social contacts were what led me to reach this conclusion ...”
In addition, R.Ü., a former public prosecutor and a former rapporteur of the Constitutional Court who was accused of being a member of the FETÖ/PDY organisation, made several statements to the Ankara public prosecutor’s office. The relevant parts of his statement recorded on 9 September 2016 read as follows:
“... Previously, I did not know that the former member of the Constitutional Court Alparslan Altan was a member of the cemaat ... However, when I noticed that this member was always in the minority in [decisions on] individual applications in which members of the cemaat were involved, I became firmly convinced that he could be a member of the cemaat ... I had already imagined, from conversations between members of the cemaat, that some members of the Constitutional Court might belong to [this structure]. But I did not know who. Over time, on account of his [positions] in these decisions, I became certain that this member [of the Constitutional Court] belonged to the cemaat ...”
In statements taken on 21 October 2016 and 19 July and 5 September 2017 R.Ü. confirmed his previous statements and asserted that although he had not met the applicant at meetings held between members of the FETÖ/PDY organisation, he was convinced that the applicant belonged to that structure. In particular, in his statements of 19 July and 5 September 2017 he mentioned that the applicant’s codename was “Selahattin”.
According to information in the case file, it was not established or alleged during the investigation that the applicant was a user of the ByLock encrypted messaging service.
However, transcripts of ByLock conversations between other individuals suspected of being members of the FETÖ/PDY organisation, namely Ö.İ., S.E. and B.Y., indicate a number of references to the applicant. According to the investigating authorities, Ö.İ., a teacher, was the “lay imam” responsible for members of the judiciary belonging to the FETÖ/PDY organisation (according to the public prosecutor’s office, each of the structure’s cells that had infiltrated the administrative and judicial authorities was led by a “lay imam”); S.E., a former rapporteur of the Constitutional Court, was in charge of the cell at that court; and B.Y., another former rapporteur of the Constitutional Court, was a member of the structure. Various measures had been taken against these three individuals in the course of the criminal investigations carried out in the aftermath of the attempted coup: in the case of Ö.İ., who had left the country, a warrant had been issued for his arrest; the same applied to S.E., who had been dismissed from his post and had fled; as for B.Y., he had been dismissed from his position as a judge by the Council of Judges and Prosecutors and had been placed in pre-trial detention on suspicion of being a member of the FETÖ/PDY organisation.
According to the investigating authorities, in the messages in question each member of the FETÖ/PDY organisation was designated by a codename. According to the suspect R.Ü., the applicant’s codename was “Selahattin” (see paragraph 36 above).
It appears from the transcripts of messages exchanged between Ö.İ., S.E. and B.Y. via ByLock that the name “Selahattin” was mentioned on several occasions in connection with cases then pending before the Constitutional Court. The transcripts of the conversations also indicate that certain internal matters of the Constitutional Court, such as the election of the vicepresident, and various cases pending before the court had been discussed by Ö.İ. and the former Constitutional Court rapporteurs. More specifically, the conversations show that, in relation to certain cases that had been brought by suspected members of the FETÖ/PDY organisation and rejected, the dissenting opinion by “Selahattin” had been praised. The transcripts also indicate that “Selahattin” had been provided with a telephone line by the FETÖ/PDY organisation.
The Government did not provide any information about the date on which these various items of evidence had been added to the case file. The applicant, however, stated that the Ankara public prosecutor’s office had received the physical digital evidence of the ByLock conversations in December 2016, that the Ankara 3rd and 5th Magistrates’ Courts had asked to have a copy of that evidence forwarded to them on 9 December 2016 and 24 March 2017, and that an expert report had been drawn up four months after the latter date.
After information had been obtained to suggest that a telephone line had been supplied by the FETÖ/PDY organisation to the individual known as “Selahattin” (see paragraph 37 above), investigations were carried out to ascertain whether the telephone line registered in the applicant’s name (“telephone line no. 1”) had sent signals from the same base station as the one used by the telephone line supplied by the FETÖ/PDY organisation (“telephone line no. 2”). It emerged that between 22 November 2015 and 16 July 2016 the two telephone lines had sent signals from the same base station. It also transpired that telephone line no. 2 was used solely for internet access and that both telephone lines had sent signals from the same location for twenty-nine days over different periods.
It was also established that two other telephone lines had been used to call individuals who had subsequently been arrested on suspicion of being members of the FETÖ/PDY organisation.
Addressing the complaint about the lawfulness of the applicant’s initial detention, the Constitutional Court held at the outset that this issue should be examined under Article 15 of the Constitution, by which, in an emergency, the exercise of fundamental rights and freedoms could be partially or fully suspended, or measures derogating from the guarantees enshrined in the Constitution for those rights and freedoms could be taken.
As to the merits of the complaint, it held firstly that it was not disputed that the alleged offence – membership of an armed terrorist organisation – was an ordinary offence punishable by a heavy sentence and thus falling within the jurisdiction of the assize courts. Secondly, it noted:
“123. The offence of which [the applicant] is accused, punishable under Article 314 of the Criminal Code, namely membership of an armed terrorist organisation, undoubtedly falls within the jurisdiction of the Assize Court, and this is not disputed by [him]. Moreover, although [the applicant] claims to have been prosecuted on account of his dissenting opinions as expressed in certain judgments of the Constitutional Court, he does not contend that the alleged offence is not an ordinary offence, that is to say, an offence [that was not] committed in connection with or during the performance of official duties. The classification of an offence (as an ordinary offence or as an offence linked to the performance of official duties) is a matter falling within the competence of the judicial authorities. The compliance of such classification with the law may also be reviewed in the context of an ordinary appeal or an appeal on points of law. Provided that there is no arbitrary interpretation – manifestly breaching the Constitution – and [entailing], as a result, [a violation of] rights and freedoms, it is primarily the task of the courts dealing with the case (derece mahkemeleri) to interpret and apply the law, including [the question of] the classification of an offence. It cannot be concluded that the classification of the offence of which [the applicant] is accused as an ordinary offence was unjustified and arbitrary, bearing in mind the findings reached and the reasons given [by the investigating bodies and judicial authorities], and in particular, the documents concerning [his] pre-trial detention.
In the present case, when the investigating bodies found that this was a case of discovery in flagrante delicto, they based that finding on the attempted coup of 15 July 2016 and the fact that the offence of which [the applicant] was accused, namely membership of an armed terrorist organisation, is a continuing offence.
According to the Court of Cassation’s consistent practice, the offence of membership of an armed terrorist organisation is a continuing offence (temadi eden suç).
...
... The plenary criminal divisions of the Court of Cassation have also held in a case concerning the conviction of two judges ... that ‘as the current and consistent position of the Court of Cassation makes clear, regarding the offence of membership of an armed terrorist organisation, which is a continuing offence, except in cases where [its continuing nature ends with] the dissolution of the organisation or termination of membership, the continuing nature [of the offence] may be interrupted by the offender’s arrest. The time and place of the offence must therefore be established to that end. For this reason, there is a situation of discovery in flagrante delicto at the time of the arrest of judges suspected of the offence of membership of an armed organisation.’
Having regard to the Court of Cassation judgments cited above, and to the fact that [the applicant] was arrested on suspicion of membership of the FETÖ/PDY organisation – deemed by the judicial authorities to constitute an armed terrorist organisation that premeditated the attempted coup – on 16 July 2016, at a time when [the authorities were taking steps to] defeat the coup attempt, it cannot be concluded that there was no factual and legal basis for the finding by the investigating bodies that the offence of membership of an armed terrorist organisation, of which [the applicant] was accused, involved a situation of discovery in flagrante delicto.
In the light of the foregoing, the allegation that [the applicant], a Constitutional Court judge, was placed in pre-trial detention in an manner not complying with law and the safeguards enshrined in the Constitution and Law no. 6216 is unfounded. Accordingly, the order for [the applicant’s] detention had a legal basis.
Before examining whether the detention order – which had a basis in law – pursued a legitimate aim and was proportionate, it should be ascertained whether there are ‘facts giving rise to a strong suspicion that the offence has been committed’, this being a prerequisite for pre-trial detention.
The [impugned] detention order states, with reference to ‘[all] the reports on searches and seizures and the entire contents of the case file’, that there was concrete evidence giving rise to a strong suspicion in respect of the suspects, including [the applicant].
It also appears from the summary report (fezleke) concerning [the applicant] that the accusation that [he] was a member of a terrorist organisation was based on the following evidence: statements by anonymous witnesses and a suspect, the contents of communications between other individuals and information concerning the signals from [the applicant’s] mobile telephones.
It should be noted that in the messages exchanged between other individuals (Ö.I., S.E. and B.Y.) via ByLock, certain references were made to [the applicant]. The investigating bodies found, on the basis of evidence such as the statements by suspects/witnesses and the messages exchanged via ByLock, that Ö.I., who is in fact a teacher, was the ‘lay imam’ responsible for the judges belonging to the FETÖ/PDY organisation, that S.E. (a rapporteur) was in charge of the organisation [within] the Constitutional Court and that B.Y. was a member of this structure. Among those individuals, an arrest warrant has been issued in respect of Ö.I., who has left the country. [Similarly], S.E., who has been dismissed from his post, has fled and a warrant has been issued for his arrest. As for B.Y., he has been dismissed from the position of judge by the Council of Judges and Prosecutors and has been placed in pre-trial detention on suspicion of being a member of the FETÖ/PDY organisation.
...
[In paragraphs 134-37 of its judgment, the Constitutional Court assessed the evidence. It then went on to conclude:]
It can therefore be observed that there is evidence in the file forming a basis for the suspicions against [the applicant].”
The Constitutional Court also observed that, in view of the very specific circumstances surrounding the attempted coup, the extent to which the FETÖ/PDY organisation had infiltrated the administrative and judicial authorities and the fact that the alleged offence was among the so-called “catalogue” offences, the order for the applicant’s pre-trial detention could be said to have been based on justifiable grounds and proportionate. In the Constitutional Court’s view, there was a risk that individuals involved in the coup attempt and those who had not been directly involved but had links to the FETÖ/PDY organisation – which was identified as the instigator of the attempted coup – might abscond, tamper with evidence or take advantage of the disorder that had emerged during or after the coup attempt. The Constitutional Court held that these particular circumstances entailed a higher risk than might arise in what could be described as “normal” circumstances. It added that it was obvious that the applicant, as a member of that court himself, might be in an easier position than others to interfere with the evidence.
On 15 January 2018 the public prosecutor’s office at the Court of Cassation filed a bill of indictment in respect of the applicant, charging him in particular, under Article 314 of the Criminal Code, with being a member of an armed terrorist organisation, namely the FETÖ/PDY organisation. After describing the characteristics of that organisation and its covert structure within the judiciary, it set out the following items of evidence against the applicant: the statements by two anonymous witnesses (see paragraphs 33-34 above); the statements by a former rapporteur of the Constitutional Court accused of belonging to the FETÖ/PDY organisation (see paragraphs 35-36 above); the messages exchanged via ByLock and other facts (relating to information about telephone lines and records of journeys abroad).
In a summary judgment of 6 March 2019 the 9th Criminal Division of the Court of Cassation sentenced the applicant to eleven years and three months’ imprisonment, in accordance with Article 314 § 2 of the Criminal Code and section 5 of the Prevention of Terrorism Act (Law no. 3713), for membership of an armed terrorist organisation. The judgment indicated that the applicant had fifteen days in which to lodge an appeal with the plenary criminal divisions of the Court of Cassation.
The applicant also lodged two further individual applications with the Constitutional Court. In his application of 3 July 2017 he alleged a violation of Articles 6, 8 and 14 of the Convention. In his application of 26 July 2018 he complained in particular that the length of his pre-trial detention had been excessive. According to the material available to the Court, both cases are still pending before the Constitutional Court.
Article 11 of the Constitution provides:
“The provisions of the Constitution are fundamental legal rules binding on the legislative, executive and judicial organs, the administrative authorities and all other institutions and individuals. Laws shall not be contrary to the Constitution.”
Article 15 of the Constitution reads as follows:
“In the event of war, general mobilisation, a state of siege or a state of emergency, the exercise of fundamental rights and freedoms may be partially or fully suspended, or measures derogating from the guarantees enshrined in the Constitution [in relation to those rights and freedoms] may be taken to the extent required by the situation, provided that obligations under international law are not violated.
Even in the circumstances listed in the first paragraph, there shall be no violation of: the individual’s right to life, except where death occurs as a result of acts compatible with the law of war; the right to physical and spiritual integrity; freedom of religion, conscience and thought or the rule that no one may be compelled to reveal his or her beliefs or blamed or accused on account of them; the prohibition of retrospective punishment; or the presumption of the accused’s innocence until a final conviction.”
The relevant parts of Article 19 of the Constitution read as follows:
“Everyone has the right to personal liberty and security.
...
Individuals against whom there are strong presumptions of guilt may be detained only by order of a judge and for the purposes of preventing their absconding or the destruction or alteration of evidence, or in any other circumstances provided for by law that also necessitate their detention. No one shall be arrested without an order by a judge except when caught in flagrante delicto or where a delay would have a harmful effect; the conditions for such action shall be determined by law.
...
A person who has been arrested or detained shall be brought before a judge within forty-eight hours at the latest or, in the case of offences committed jointly with others, within four days, not including the time required to convey the person to the nearest court to the place of detention. No one shall be deprived of his or her liberty after the expiry of the aforementioned periods except by order of a judge. These periods may be extended during a state of emergency or a state of siege or in time of war.
...”
The relevant parts of Law no. 6216, published in the Official Gazette on 3 April 2011, provide as follows:
“(1) The opening of an investigation in respect of the President and members [of the Constitutional Court] for offences allegedly committed in connection with or during the performance of their official duties, ordinary offences and disciplinary offences shall be subject to a decision by the plenary court. However, in cases of discovery in flagrante delicto falling within the jurisdiction of the assize courts (ağır ceza mahkemesinin görevine giren suçüstü hâllerinde), the investigation shall be conducted in accordance with the rules of ordinary law.
...
(3) Where appropriate, the President may appoint a member to carry out a preliminary examination of the case before it is referred to the plenary court. After completing the preliminary examination, the member thus appointed ... shall submit a report to the President.
(4) Once the case has been placed on the agenda by the President, the plenary court shall deliberate on it. The member concerned may not take part in the deliberations. Where the plenary court decides not to open an investigation, the member concerned and the complainants shall be notified of the decision.
(5) Where a decision is taken to open an investigation, the plenary court shall elect three of its members to form the investigation committee. The investigation committee shall be chaired by the senior member. It shall be vested with all the powers conferred upon the public prosecutor by the Code of Criminal Procedure (Law no. 5271 of 4 December 2004). Any procedural steps requested by the investigation committee shall be carried out immediately by the competent local judicial bodies. ...”
“(1) Except in cases of discovery in flagrante delicto of ordinary offences within the jurisdiction of the assize courts, preventive measures against the President and members [of the Constitutional Court] on account of alleged offences committed in connection with or during the performance of official duties may be ordered only in accordance with the provisions of this section.
(2) In cases of discovery in flagrante delicto of ordinary offences within the jurisdiction of the assize courts, the investigation shall be conducted in accordance with the rules of ordinary law. Where an indictment is drawn up, the prosecution shall be conducted by the plenary criminal divisions of the Court of Cassation [since 2 January 2017: ‘by the appropriate criminal division of the Court of Cassation’].
(3) In the case of alleged offences committed in connection with or during the performance of official duties and also of ordinary offences, except in cases of discovery in flagrante delicto of ordinary offences within the jurisdiction of the assize courts, where the investigation committee requests a preventive measure as provided for in Law no. 5271 [the CCP] and other laws the plenary court shall give a decision on the request.
(4) Where the investigation committee, after completing its investigation, considers that no charges are necessary, it shall give a decision not to prosecute. If the committee considers it appropriate to bring charges, it shall refer the matter to the Constitutional Court, in the case of offences linked to the performance of official duties, in order for it to adjudicate as the supreme court, or to the President [of the Constitutional Court], in the case of ordinary offences, in order for him or her to refer the case to the plenary criminal divisions of the Court of Cassation [since 2 January 2017: ‘to the appropriate criminal division of the Court of Cassation’]. The suspect and, where appropriate, the complainants shall be notified of the decisions of the investigation committee.”
Article 309 § 1 of the Criminal Code is worded as follows:
“Anyone who attempts to overthrow by force or violence the constitutional order provided for by the Constitution of the Republic of Turkey or to establish a different order in its place, or de facto to prevent its implementation, whether fully or in part, shall be sentenced to aggravated life imprisonment.”
Article 314 §§ 1 and 2 of the Criminal Code, which provides for the offence of membership of an illegal organisation, reads as follows:
“1.  Anyone who forms or leads an organisation with the purpose of committing the offences listed in the fourth and fifth parts of this chapter shall be sentenced to ten to fifteen years’ imprisonment.
Any member of an organisation referred to in the first paragraph above shall be sentenced to five to ten years’ imprisonment.”
The relevant parts of Article 2 of the CCP provide:
“...
(j) the following shall be classified as cases of discovery in flagrante delicto (suçüstü):
...”
Article 91 § 2 of the CCP provides:
“Placement in pre-trial detention shall be dependent on the necessity of this measure for the investigation and on evidence giving rise to a suspicion that the individual has committed an offence.”
Article 91 § 5 of the CCP provides that the arrested person or his or her representative, partner or relatives may lodge an objection against the arrest, the police custody order or the extension of the police custody period with a view to securing the person’s release. The objection must be examined within twenty-four hours at the latest.
The relevant parts of Article 100 §§ 1 and 2 of the CCP provide:
“1.  If there are facts giving rise to a strong suspicion that the [alleged] offence has been committed and to a ground for pre-trial detention, a detention order may be made in respect of a suspect or an accused. Pre-trial detention may only be ordered in proportion to the sentence or preventive measure that could potentially be imposed, bearing in mind the significance of the case.
In the cases listed below, a ground for detention shall be presumed to exist:
For certain offences listed in Article 100 § 3 of the CCP (the so-called “catalogue offences”), there is a statutory presumption of the existence of grounds for detention. The relevant passages of Article 100 § 3 of the CCP read:
“3.  If there are facts giving rise to a strong suspicion that the offences listed below have been committed, it can be presumed that there are grounds for detention:
...
...”
Article 101 of the CCP provides that reasons must be given for extending detention and for finding that alternative measures would be insufficient.
Under Article 109 of the CCP, as in force at the material time, even if all the grounds for detention were present, the court had the option of placing a suspect under judicial supervision instead of ordering detention where the suspect faced a maximum sentence of three years’ imprisonment.
Article 141 § 1 (a) of the CCP provides:
“Compensation for damage ... may be claimed from the State by anyone ...:
...”
Article 142 § 1 of the CCP reads as follows:
“The claim for compensation may be lodged within three months after the person concerned has been informed that the decision or judgment has become final, and in any event within one year after the decision or judgment has become final.”
According to the practice of the Court of Cassation, it is not necessary to wait for a final decision on the merits of the case before ruling on a claim brought under Article 141 of the CCP for compensation for the excessive length of pre-trial detention (decisions E.2014/21585, K.2015/10868 and E. 2014/6167, K. 2015/10867).
Under section 12 of Law no. 5235 of 7 October 2004, the offence of membership of an armed organisation falls within the jurisdiction of the assize courts.
In a judgment of 20 April 2015 (E.2015/1069, K.2015/840) the 16th Criminal Division of the Court of Cassation held as follows:
“... The offence of membership of an armed organisation is committed by means of voluntary submission to the organisation’s hierarchy and acceptance of the organisation’s founding aims and its activities ... Although the offence is completed by the act of joining the organisation, it continues to be committed throughout membership ...”
In a judgment of 6 April 2016 (E.2015/7367, K.2016/2130) the same Criminal Division of the Court of Cassation held as follows:
“The continuing nature of an offence ends at the time of the arrest. Where acts of a certain seriousness that are capable of [achieving] the organisation’s aims are carried out between the time of joining the organisation and the time of the arrest, consideration must be given both to the legal rules governing each of the offences and to the provisions governing the combination of offences ...”
In a judgment of 18 July 2017 (E.2016/7162, K.2017/4786) the same division held:
“... Membership of an organisation is punishable under Article 220 § 2 of the Criminal Code.
...
A member of an organisation is a person who adheres to the hierarchy [of the structure] and as a result submits to the will of the organisation by being ready to discharge the duties entrusted to him or her. [Membership of] an organisation means joining it, having a bond with it and submitting to its hierarchical authority. A member of the organisation must have an organic link with it and participate in its activities.
Although it is not an essential prerequisite for punishment of a member of an organisation that the member has committed an offence in connection with the organisation’s activities and for the achievement of its aims, the individual must nevertheless have made a specific material or moral contribution to the organisation’s actual existence and moral reinforcement. As membership is a continuing offence, such acts must be of a certain intensity ...
The fact of belonging to the organisation, which constitutes a continuing offence, is treated as a single offence up to the termination of a legal and factual situation. Membership of the organisation ends with the individual’s arrest, the dissolution of the organisation, or the individual’s exclusion or departure from the organisation.
...
Offence of creating and being a member of a terrorist organisation:
For a structure to be classified as a terrorist organisation under Article 314 of the Criminal Code, in addition to satisfying the essential requirements for the existence of an organisation as set forth in Article 220 of the Criminal Code, the organisation must also be established with the aim of committing the offences [listed in certain chapters of the Criminal Code] ... and must also have access to sufficient weapons or the possibility of using them in order to achieve that aim ...”
In a leading judgment of 10 October 2017 (E.2017/YYB-997, K.2017/404) the plenary criminal divisions of the Court of Cassation ruled on the jurisdiction of the assize courts in relation to alleged offences by members of the judiciary. They held as follows:
“... as the current and consistent position of the Court of Cassation makes clear, regarding the offence of membership of an armed terrorist organisation, which is a continuing offence, except in cases where [its continuing nature ends with] the dissolution of the organisation or termination of membership, the continuing nature [of the offence] may be interrupted by the offender’s arrest. The time and place of the offence must therefore be established to that end. For this reason, there is a situation of discovery in flagrante delicto at the time of the arrest of judges suspected of the offence of membership of an armed organisation, and [consequently] the investigation must be carried out in accordance with the provisions of ordinary law ...”
In a judgment of 11 January 2018 (no. 2016/23672) concerning the detention of a journalist, Mehmet Hasan Altan, the Constitutional Court examined a complaint concerning the lawfulness of that measure (see Mehmet Hasan Altan v. Turkey, no. 13237/17, §§ 35-44, 20 March 2018). After examining the evidence forming the basis for the applicant’s pre-trial detention, it concluded that “strong evidence that an offence had been committed” had not been sufficiently established in the case before it. Next, the Constitutional Court examined whether there had been a violation of the right to liberty and security in the light of Article 15 of the Constitution. On this point, it noted firstly that in a state of emergency, the Constitution provided for the possibility of taking measures derogating from the guarantees set forth in Article 19, to the extent required by the situation. It observed, however, that if it were accepted that people could be placed in pre-trial detention without any strong evidence that they had committed an offence, the guarantees of the right to liberty and security would be meaningless. Accordingly, it held that Mr Altan’s pre-trial detention was disproportionate to the strict exigencies of the situation and that his right to liberty and security, as safeguarded by Article 19 § 3 of the Constitution, had been breached.
The Government referred to Recommendation CM/Rec(2010)12 of the Committee of Ministers to member States, entitled “Judges: independence, efficiency and responsibilities” and adopted on 17 November 2010. The relevant parts of the Recommendation read as follows:
“Liability and disciplinary proceedings
The interpretation of the law, assessment of facts or weighing of evidence carried out by judges to determine cases should not give rise to civil or disciplinary liability, except in cases of malice and gross negligence.
...
The interpretation of the law, assessment of facts or weighing of evidence carried out by judges to determine cases should not give rise to criminal liability, except in cases of malice.
...
When not exercising judicial functions, judges are liable under civil, criminal and administrative law in the same way as any other citizen.”
On 21 July 2016 the Permanent Representative of Turkey to the Council of Europe sent the Secretary General of the Council of Europe the following notice of derogation:
“I communicate the following notice of the Government of the Republic of Turkey.
On 15 July 2016, a large-scale coup attempt was staged in the Republic of Turkey to overthrow the democratically-elected government and the constitutional order. This despicable attempt was foiled by the Turkish state and people acting in unity and solidarity. The coup attempt and its aftermath together with other terrorist acts have posed severe dangers to public security and order, amounting to a threat to the life of the nation in the meaning of Article 15 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms.
The Republic of Turkey is taking the required measures as prescribed by law, in line with the national legislation and its international obligations. In this context, on 20 July 2016, the Government of the Republic of Turkey declared a State of Emergency for a duration of three months, in accordance with the Constitution (Article 120) and the Law No. 2935 on State of Emergency (Article 3/1b). ...
The decision was published in the Official Gazette and approved by the Turkish Grand National Assembly on 21 July 2016. Thus, the State of Emergency takes effect as from this date. In this process, measures taken may involve derogation from the obligations under the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms, permissible in Article 15 of the Convention.
I would therefore underline that this letter constitutes information for the purposes of Article 15 of the Convention. The Government of the Republic of Turkey shall keep you, Secretary General, fully informed of the measures taken to this effect. The Government shall inform you when the measures have ceased to operate.
...”