PROCEDURE
“...Psychiatric status
The patient is available for verbal contact. However such contact is highly formal. Mimics and movements are spontaneous and incongruous. He cannot understand or appreciate the purpose of the examination or the situation in general. The patient is restless, euphoric, fidgety, talkative but incoherent in his speech. .... The patient ... roars with laughter and grimaces, sticking his tongue out. ... Sometimes he starts asking in a whisper whether he will be released, but having received the answer, asks the same question again. ... If asked about his experience after the arrest, the patient becomes restless, somewhat confused, the expression on his face becomes blank. ... His memory and intelligence cannot be tested for lack of productive contact... Sometimes he becomes tense, restless and quarrelsome....
Conclusion
Mr Kucheruk currently shows symptoms of acute personality disorder in the form of a reactive state of mind.
It is at present impossible to determine the question of his sanity at the time of the offences on account of the complexity of the clinical manifestations of his reactive state of mind, which could also point to another mental illness.
Mr Kucheruk’s mental state requires compulsory inpatient psychiatric treatment.”
“Mr Kucheruk’s preventive detention on remand is to be revoked upon his admission to the psychiatric establishment.
The judgment may be appealed against to the Kharkov Regional Court of Appeal within fifteen days from its delivery.”
“10 July 2002 ... [the applicant] lurched towards me, stretching out his handcuffed hands...
12 July 2002 ... [the applicant] was moving quickly around the cell, bending down and trying to pull his legs between his handcuffed hands... banging his head against the wall trying to free himself from the handcuffs ...
16 July 2002 ... [the applicant] is trying to remove the handcuffs, rolling on the floor”.
“Examination
Mr Kucheruk has a 2.5x0.5 cm oblong abrasion with a thick scab on the outer part of his right wrist. The wound is horizontal. Similar abrasions are observed on the inner part of the right wrist and the outer and inner parts of the left wrist, as well as on the left elbow, the right occipital area and the inner-rear and frontal parts of the left thigh. These injuries measure from 1x0.2 cm. to 5.5x0.3 cm. ...
Conclusion
According to the medical documents provided [by the Governor of the SIZO] it is established that Mr Kucheruk bore bruises and abrasions which had been inflicted by blunt solid objects.
When Mr Kucheruk was examined on 14.08.2002 he had abrasions on his head, right foot, arms and left thigh. He also had bruises on the left eye and the left shoulder. All these injuries were inflicted by blunt solid objects. The bruises were three to five days old and the abrasions seven to ten days old...
Having regard to the description of the injuries in medical documents [drawn up by the SIZO staff], as well as the entries for 8 and 15 July 2002, where the injuries are not described at all, and the nature of the injuries (indicating the use of truncheons and handcuffs), it is impossible to draw any conclusions about the time of the injuries.
Mr Kucheruk’s injuries could have been inflicted by special equipment (truncheons and handcuffs).”
“...Mr Kucheruk arrived at the [SIZO] with a medical certificate, issued by the city hospital no. 13 on 15 April 2002, according to which he was fit to be detained in a SIZO. ... On the basis of this information Mr Kucheruk was placed in a psychiatric ward of the medical wing.
On 16 April 2002 Mr Kucheruk was examined by [the prison psychiatrist] who diagnosed him as suffering from schizophrenia. At the time of the examination his mental condition was satisfactory and he did not need any active treatment.”
“On 3 July 2002 Mr Kucheruk was examined by [the prison psychiatrist], who found him suffering from schizophrenia and catatonic stupor and prescribed the relevant medication.
On 4 July 2002 the patient recovered from the catatonic stupor ... but continued to have tense relations with his cellmates.
Accordingly, based on general information about Mr Kucheruk’s behaviour, the officers on duty were warned daily about his possible violent outbursts against his cellmates or the SIZO staff.”
“The [’s judgment of 5 July 2002] did not contain any provision for immediate execution. It set out a fifteen-day time limit for appeal; therefore the term provided by Article 404 of the Code of Criminal Procedure for execution of this judgment was complied with as the applicant was transferred to the [Hospital] on 17 July 2002.”
“Article 28
Everyone has the right to respect for his or her dignity.
No one shall be subjected to torture, cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment that violates his or her dignity. ...
Article 29
Every person has the right to freedom and personal inviolability.
No one shall be arrested or held in custody other than pursuant to a substantiated court decision and only on the grounds and in accordance with the procedure established by law...”
The text of Article 19 and Articles 92 and 94-96 of the Criminal Code of 5 April 2001 can be found in the Court’s judgment in the case of Gorshkov v. Ukraine (no. 67531/01, § 28, 8 November 2005).
“Excess of authority or official powers, that is the wilful commission by an official of acts which patently exceed the rights and powers vested in him or her and which cause any significant damage to the legally protected rights and interests of individual citizens, state and public interests or those of legal entities shall be punishable ....”
“Neglect of official duty, that is failure to perform, or improper performance, by an official of his or her official duties due to negligence, where it causes any significant damage to the legally protected rights and interests of individual citizens, state and public interests or those of legal entities, shall be punishable ...”
The relevant provisions of the CCrP regulating the conduct of pretrial investigation proceedings are summarised in the Court’s judgment in the case of Sergey Shevchenko v. Ukraine (no. 32478/02, §§ 38 and 39, 4 April 2006),
Articles 148 (purpose of and grounds for taking preventive measures), 149 (list of preventive measures), 150 (circumstances that should be taken into account in choosing a preventive measure) and 156 (time-limits for holding in custody) of the CCrP are to be found in the Nevmerzhitsky v. Ukraine judgment (no. 54825/00, § 53, ECHR 2005).
“Detention on remand as a preventive measure shall be applied in cases concerning offences for which the law envisages a penalty of more than three years’ imprisonment...
Persons against whom a detention on remand order is issued shall be held in pre-trial detention centres.”
“In a case received from the prosecutor [with the bill of indictment], the judge in a preliminary hearing shall resolve the following questions:
...4) whether there are any reasons to change, terminate or apply a preventive measure.”
“A preparatory hearing shall be held within 10 days or, in complex cases, 30 days of receipt of the case-file by the court.”
“If forensic medical or psychiatric examination necessitates long-term monitoring or assessment of the suspect, the court, on the investigator’s request and with the prosecutor’s authorisation, may order the suspect’s commitment to the relevant medical institution.”
“An appeal may be lodged against:
...2)  a court order concerning the application of ... compulsory medical treatment.”
According to Article 349 of the CCrP:
“An appeal against a judgment, ruling or order of a first instance court ... may be filed within fifteen days of its adoption...”
“The court order or ruling shall become final and enforceable upon the expiry of the time-limit for appeal.”
Article 424 provides as follows:
“An appeal or cassation appeal or an appellate or cassation petition by the prosecutor (апеляційне чи касаційне подання прокурора) against a ruling or resolution adopted by a judge or a court in the manner laid down by this Chapter, shall be entered in the ordinary manner.”
“Pre-trial investigation in cases concerning illegal acts committed by persons who are not criminally responsible or who bear only limited criminal responsibility, as well as in cases concerning offences committed by persons who become mentally ill after the events in question but before the imposition of the sentence, shall be conducted by the investigating authorities pursuant to the rules set out in Articles 111-130 and 148222 of the present Code.
Following the completion of the pre-trial investigation, if the alleged offender is found to have no, or limited, criminal responsibility, the investigator shall draw up a ruling requesting the court to commit the person for compulsory medical treatment ... This ruling shall be sent to the prosecutor.”
“Having received a case with the ruling under Article 417 of this Code, the prosecutor:
1)  if he agrees with the ruling, shall confirm it and transmit the case to the court;
2)  if he finds that the ... collected evidence is insufficient to reach a conclusion as to the mental condition of the accused or that the collected evidence is insufficient to prove that the illegal act was committed by the person concerned, shall return the case-file to the investigator with written instructions for further inquires.”
“If the judge or the president of the relevant court who received the case-file with the request for compulsory medical treatment agrees with the investigator’s ruling, he or she shall send the case directly for trial.
The trial in such cases shall be held in open hearing, with the obligatory participation of the prosecutor and defence lawyer, in accordance with rules laid down in Chapters 25 and 26 [Articles 283-317] of this Code.”
“When it is established that a [mentally ill] person has committed an illegal act or a person became mentally ill after committing an offence ... the court shall commit him or her for compulsory medical measures, indicating exactly what measure should be applied.”
Article 221 of the CCivP provides in its relevant part:
“Detained persons shall be held in ordinary cells. In exceptional circumstances ... and for medical reasons, following a reasoned decision of the relevant investigating authority or governor of the relevant pre-trial detention facility, a detainee may be placed in solitary confinement.”
Psychiatric Medical Assistance Act, 2000
Resolution no. 49 of the Cabinet of Ministers of , of 27 February 1991, on the Rules of Application of Special Means in Maintaining Public Order
Decree No. 346/877 of the Ministry of Health of 19 December 2000 on measures for the prevention of illegal actions of persons who suffer from severe mental disorder
The relevant extracts from Decree no. 397 of the Ministry of Health of 8 August 2001 on the procedure for applying compulsory measures of medical treatment in psychiatric hospitals to persons who have mental illnesses and who have committed socially dangerous acts (approved by the Supreme Court of Ukraine, the Ministry of Internal Affairs and the General Prosecution Service) are set out in Gorshkov (cited above, § 32).
The relevant extracts from the Instruction on the procedure for applying measures of compulsory medical treatment to persons of unsound mind who have committed socially dangerous acts (adopted by Decree No. 397 of the Ministry of Health) are also quoted in the case of Gorshkov (cited above, § 33).
Resolution no. 15 of the Plenary Supreme Court on judicial practice in cases involving excess of power, of 26 December 2003
The 1983 Resolution was valid at the material time. In 2005 it was replaced by Resolution no. 7 of 3 June 2005.
In both Resolutions (1983 and 2005 - Sections 9 and 15 respectively) the Supreme Court, interpreting domestic law regulating the types of compulsory measures of a medical character, stated that a court which orders compulsory treatment of a person against whom a preventive measure had been taken should simultaneously order the discontinuation of the preventive measure from the moment of the person’s admission to a psychiatric institution.
The relevant extracts from Committee of Ministers Recommendation No. R (87) 3 on the European Prison Rules (adopted by the Committee of Ministers on 12 February 1987 at the 404th meeting of the Ministers’ Deputies) read as follows:
“Medical services
1.  At every institution there shall be available the services of at least one qualified general practitioner. The medical services should be organised in close relation with the general heath administration of the community or nation. They shall include a psychiatric service for the diagnosis and, in proper cases, the treatment of states of mental abnormality.
Sick prisoners who require specialist treatment shall be transferred to specialised institutions or to civil hospitals. Where hospital facilities are provided in an institution, their equipment, furnishings and pharmaceutical supplies shall be suitable for the medical care and treatment of sick prisoners, and there shall be staff of suitably trained officers.
1.  The medical officer shall have the care of the physical and mental health of the prisoners and shall see, under the conditions and with a frequency consistent with hospital standards, all sick prisoners, all who report illness or injury and any prisoner to whom attention is specially directed.
The medical officer shall report to the director whenever it is considered that a prisoner’s physical or mental health has been or will be adversely affected by continued imprisonment or by any condition of imprisonment.
Discipline and punishment
1.  Punishment by disciplinary confinement and any other punishment which might have an adverse effect on the physical or mental health of the prisoner shall only be imposed if the medical officer, after examination, certifies in writing that the prisoner is fit to sustain it.
Instruments of restraint
The use of chains and irons shall be prohibited. Handcuffs, restraint-jackets and other body restraints shall never be applied as a punishment. They shall not be used except in the following circumstances:
if necessary, as a precaution against escape during a transfer, provided that they shall be removed when the prisoner appears before a judicial or administrative authority unless that authority decides otherwise;
on medical grounds, by direction and under the supervision of the medical officer;
by order of the director, if other methods of control fail, in order to protect a prisoner from self-injury, injury to others or to prevent serious damage to property; in such instances the director shall at once consult the medical officer and report to the higher administrative authority.
The patterns and manner of use of the instruments of restraint authorised in the preceding paragraph shall be decided by law or regulation. Such instruments must not be applied for any longer time than is strictly necessary.
Insane and mentally abnormal prisoners
1.  Persons who are found to be insane should not be detained in prisons and arrangements shall be made to remove them to appropriate establishments for the mentally ill as soon as possible.
Specialised institutions or sections under medical management should be available for the observation and treatment of prisoners suffering gravely from any other mental disease or abnormality.
The medical or psychiatric service of the penal institutions shall provide for the psychiatric treatment of all prisoners who are in need of such treatment.”
“The CPT would point out that all mentally ill prisoners, including those serving life sentences, should be cared for and receive treatment in a hospital facility adequately equipped and with qualified staff. Forcing such prisoners to stay in prison, where they cannot receive appropriate treatment for lack of suitable facilities or because such a facility refuses to accept them, is an unacceptable state of affairs. The transfer of mentally ill prisoners to an appropriate psychiatric facility should be considered a high priority.”