The case originated in an application (no. 55214/15) against the Portuguese Republic lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Portuguese national, Mr Rafael Martins O’Neill Pedrosa (“the applicant”), on 28 October 2015.
The applicant was represented by Mr H. Garcia, a lawyer practising in Mafra. The Portuguese Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Ms M. F. da Graça Carvalho, Deputy Attorney General.
The applicant alleged that the lawfulness of his pre-trial detention had not been reviewed “speedily”, as required by Article 5 § 4 of the Convention.
On 22 January 2016 the application was communicated to the Government.
The applicant was born in 1995. According to the last information received by the Court on 6 October 2016, the applicant is detained in Lisbon.
On 5 December 2013 criminal proceedings were initiated against the applicant by the public prosecutor of the Department of Investigation and Prosecution (Departamento de Investigação e Ação Penal) in Sintra in respect of allegations of him having committed the crimes of coercion (coação), aggravated attacks upon the physical integrity of a person (ofensas à integridade física qualificada), rape (violação), and failing to assist a person in danger (omissão de auxílio).
On 2 June 2014 the public prosecutor issued a European arrest warrant (“EAW”) in respect of the applicant in order to secure his presence before a judicial authority to be questioned (primeiro interrogatório judicial).
On 28 August 2014 the applicant was arrested in the United Kingdom. Under the EAW issued by the Portuguese authorities, he was surrendered to the Portuguese authorities on 27 February 2015.
On 27 February 2015, the applicant was given the status of defendant in the criminal proceedings against him (constituição de arguido) and questioned by the investigating judge (primeiro interrogatório judicial). On the same day, the investigating judge remanded the applicant in custody.
On 19 March 2015 the applicant lodged an appeal with the Lisbon Court of Appeal, challenging the lawfulness of the decision remanding him in custody, pursuant to Article 219 § 1 of the Code of Criminal Procedure.
On 2 April 2015 the investigating judge declared the appeal admissible and requested that the public prosecutor be asked to submit observations on the applicant’s appeal.
On 27 April 2015 the public prosecutor submitted observations on the applicant’s appeal.
On 29 April 2015 the investigating judge ordered that the applicant be notified of the public prosecutor’s observations and that the file be sent to the Lisbon Court of Appeal.
On 4 May 2015 the file was sent to the Lisbon Court of Appeal. On 11 May 2015 it was received and distributed.
On 13 May 2015 the public prosecutor issued an opinion on the appeal, pursuant to Article 416 of the Code of Criminal Procedure. The applicant was subsequently notified of the opinion and given ten days to reply, pursuant to Article 417 of the Code of Criminal Procedure.
.  On an unknown date, a judge rapporteur appointed to the case made a preliminary examination of the applicant’s appeal and prepared a draft decision which was presented to two other judges. The judge rapporteur’s analysis of the appeal was afterwards put on the agenda for discussion by the judge rapporteur and the two other judges.
On 24 June 2015 the applicant lodged a habeas corpus application with the Supreme Court, claiming that the lack of analysis of his appeal in respect of the lawfulness of the decision placing him in pre-trial detention had violated Article 5 § 4 of the Convention. He further argued that the time-limit of thirty days established under Article 219 § 1 of the Code of Criminal Procedure had not been complied with. Therefore, his pre-trial detention had been unlawful.
On 2 July 2015 the Supreme Court dismissed the applicant’s habeas corpus application. Examining the effects of the thirty-day time-limit on pre-trial detention orders, it considered that the thirty-day time-limit on pre-trial detention orders simply constituted a guiding principle illustrating the urgency of such matters. It further noted that the lack of a speedy review of an order remanding a person in custody did not constitute a ground for a habeas corpus application under Article 222 of the Code and pointed out that Article 219 § 1 did not, in any case, stipulate the maximum length of any pre-trial detention. In this regard, the non-compliance with the thirty-day time-limit did not mean that the applicant’s pre-trial detention had been unlawful.
On 2 July 2015 the Lisbon Court of Appeal dismissed the applicant’s appeal and upheld the investigating judge’s decision of 27 February 2015 to hold him in pre-trial detention.
Article 108 of the Portuguese Code of Criminal Procedure provides for interlocutory proceedings to expedite criminal proceedings. The relevant part of the provision reads as follows:
“1. When the time-limits provided by law in respect of any stage of the proceedings are exceeded, the public prosecutor, the defendant, the assistant to the public prosecutor or the civil parties may lodge an application for an order to expedite the proceedings.”
Under Article 219 § 1, an appellate court has a maximum of thirty days in which to rule on the lawfulness of a pre-trial detention order, starting from the date on which it receives the relevant file.
Under Article 222 § 1, anyone who is illegally held in pre-trial detention may lodge a habeas corpus application with the Supreme Court.
Under Article 222 § 2 pre-trial detention is unlawful if a) it was ordered by an authority that does not have authority to do so; b) the law does not allow the ordering of pre-trial detention for the reasons cited; or c) it has exceeded the time-limits established by law or judicial decision.
Under Article 416 § 1, before a case is submitted to a rapporteur it is given to the public prosecutor attached to the court of appeal for an opinion (vista). Under Article 417 § 2 the defendant shall be notified of the public prosecutor’s opinion; the defendant will then be given ten days to reply. After the public prosecutor has given an opinion, under Article 417 § 1 the case is given to a judge rapporteur for a preliminary examination.
In a judgment of 16 March 2011 the Supreme Court of Justice stated that Article 219 § 1 of the Code on Criminal Procedure (which concerns appeals against a detention order) did not constitute a mandatory legal provision. On the contrary, it constituted merely a guiding principle in respect of the conduct of such proceedings: that is to say that decisions on detention orders and related appeals should be considered urgent and the analysis of such appeals should not be delayed. It further considered that if the thirty-day time-limit were supposed to have been considered binding, a legal provision stipulating the direct consequences of any non-compliance should have been established.