The case originated in two applications (nos. 53205/13 and 63320/13) against the Republic of North Macedonia lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by two Macedonians/ citizens of North Macedonia, Mr Jovche Trajkovski (“the first applicant”) and Mr Dimitar Chipovski (“the second applicant”), on 16 August and 4 October 2013 respectively.
The applicants were represented by Ms N. Boshkova, a lawyer practising in Skopje. The Government of North Macedonia (“the Government”) were initially represented by their Agent, Mr K. Bogdanov, and then by their current Agent, Ms D. Djonova.
The applicants alleged that the regulatory framework on the basis of which the authorities had collected, processed and stored their DNA material was incompatible with the requirements under Article 8 of the Convention.
On 18 April 2016 the Government were given notice of the applications.
The applicants were born in 1982 and 1979 respectively and live in Skopje.
On 11 February 2010 two police officers approached the first applicant while he was walking down a street and questioned him about a steering wheel lock which he was holding at the time. He was taken to a police station, where police officers took a mouth swab from him without giving him any explanation. In the ensuing criminal proceedings he was convicted of aggravated theft (theft of a car radio) and given a suspended prison sentence. The DNA findings of the sample taken from him were submitted as evidence against him.
The first applicant was convicted of other crimes of theft and aggravated theft prior to and after the proceedings in question.
On 25 March 2010 the first applicant filed a complaint with the Personal Data Protection Directorate (“the Directorate”), alleging that the police officers had violated his right to privacy. He contended that they had taken cellular material from his mouth unlawfully, without a court order and without his consent. He argued that the police had had no legal right to take and retain his DNA material.
By a decision of 12 April 2010 the Directorate dismissed his complaint, finding that the police officers “had taken [the first applicant’s] DNA sample and processed it in order to detect any criminal and minor offences, that is, to establish the identity of a person suspected of committing a crime punishable by law”. Relying on section 5(1)(1) and (2) of the Personal Data Protection Act, sections 14 and 66 of the Police Act and section 6 of the Rules on Police Conduct (see paragraphs 21, 23, 24 and 29 below), the Directorate found that the police were authorised to take, retain and process the personal data of an individual when there was a reasonable suspicion that he or she had committed a punishable crime. Such actions were aimed at the prevention and detection of crime. Furthermore, the police were authorised to establish the identity of a person on the basis of, inter alia, a DNA sample.
The first applicant challenged that decision before the Administrative Court, arguing that there was no law regarding the collection, storage and processing of DNA material. In that connection, he submitted that DNA material was stored indefinitely. Furthermore, given that his identity had been known to the authorities at the relevant time, there had been no justification for taking a DNA sample from him. In his view, it could be used for “any future investigations which mark[ed him] out”.
On 6 June 2012 the Administrative Court dismissed the applicant’s complaint. In addition to the arguments given in the Directorate’s decision, the court referred to section 69 of the Police Act (see paragraph 25 below) and held that the police were authorised to collect and process personal data, including genetic data, for the purposes of “the detection and prevention of criminal and minor offences and for the detection and apprehension of perpetrators, i.e. regarding an individual about whom there was a reasonable suspicion that he or she [had] committed or participated in the planning, financing or execution of a criminal offence, as was the case with [the first applicant].”On 24 January 2013 (served on the applicant on 22 February 2013) the Higher Administrative Court upheld the lower court’s decision, finding no reason to depart from the reasoning given therein.
On 8 October 2009 the second applicant was arrested and taken to a police station, where he was interrogated in relation to allegations of theft. An identity parade was organised and a mouth swab was taken from him. After the proceedings had been reopened, in 2014 he was convicted of aggravated theft and given a suspended prison sentence. The analysis of his DNA make-up was not submitted as evidence against him.
The applicant has another more recent conviction (not yet final) of aggravated theft, for which he was given a suspended sentence.
On 26 May 2010 the second applicant complained to the Directorate that the police had violated his right to privacy by taking and processing his DNA material.
In reply to the second applicant’s complaint, the Ministry of the Interior submitted several documents. It stated that on the basis of, inter alia, the Instruction on the manner and methods for forensic registration and identification dated 25 February 2009 (see paragraph 30 below), the Forensics Bureau within the Ministry of the Interior had requested that a DNA sample be taken from him. Attempts by him to obtain a copy of the Instruction were to no avail because the Ministry of the Interior stated that it “is not of a public nature, i.e. the Instruction is an internal act ... and has no effect outside the Ministry ...”
On 21 July 2010 the Directorate dismissed the second applicant’s complaint, holding that he had been arrested without a court order on account of a reasonable suspicion of theft. In the identity parade the victim had identified him as the perpetrator. The police had taken a DNA sample from his mouth and submitted a criminal complaint against him. Referring to the same provisions as in the first applicant’s case (see paragraph 9 above), the Directorate found that the police had undertaken investigative measures in respect of the second applicant, who had been suspected of committing aggravated theft. The police had therefore acted in accordance with the law and had not breached the Personal Data Protection Act.
The applicant challenged that decision, arguing that there was no legislative regulation of the collection, storage and processing of DNA material as a specific category of personal data that contained information about individuals, including information about their health and genetic make-up. Furthermore, there was no legislation on the use of DNA or the time-limits for storing it. He maintained that as there had been other means of establishing his identity, the collection and processing of his DNA had not been justified or necessary in his case.
On 6 June 2012 the Administrative Court dismissed the second applicant’s complaint, finding that the Ministry of the Interior was authorised to collect and process personal data, including genetic material, in order to prevent and detect criminal and minor offences and to find and apprehend the perpetrators of such crimes.
The applicant appealed. He submitted that his identity had been known to the police. Since the criminal complaint against him had pre-dated the analysis of his DNA, the relevant material had been unlawfully taken from him and stored. The criminal complaint concerned charges of aggravated theft and the Ministry of the Interior had confirmed in similar proceedings that no DNA analysis had ever been carried out in cases of suspected theft and aggravated theft (see paragraph 31 below).
On 12 March 2013 (served on the applicant on 12 April 2013) the Higher Administrative Court dismissed the second applicant’s appeal and upheld the lower court’s decision. Referring to the legislation specified above, the court held that the police had taken and processed the DNA material because the second applicant had been suspected of committing a crime.
Section 5 of the Personal Data Protection Act provides, inter alia, that personal data is to be processed reasonably and in accordance with the law and collected for specific and clear aims specified by law. It is to be processed in a manner suitable to those aims. It is to be retained in a form which allows for the identification of the person concerned and no longer than is necessary to fulfil the purposes for which the data has been collected. After the time-limit for storage of the personal data has expired, it may only be processed for historical, scientific or statistical purposes.
Under section 7, personal data related to criminal offences, penalties and security measures is to be processed by the competent State authorities in accordance with the law.
Section 14 of the Police Act provides that a police officer can take, of his or her own motion or by order of the public prosecutor, court or other body measures for the detection of a crime and prosecution of a person who is suspected of planning or committing a crime.
Under section 66(1) the police are authorised to collect, store, process, examine, transfer and delete personal data under the conditions specified by law and maintain a database of personal data for the prevention and detection of criminal and minor offences and in order to find the perpetrators of such acts.
Section 69 provides that the police are to maintain a database of persons for whom DNA profiles have been compiled.
Section 54 of the amendments to the Police Act, which became effective (се применува) as of 1 December 2012, namely after the taking of DNA samples from the applicants, provides that DNA data (section 69) are retained permanently (трајно).
Section 249(3) and (5) of the Criminal Proceeding Act provides that DNA samples can be collected for the identification of persons or for comparison with other biological samples and DNA profiles. In such circumstances the consent of the person concerned is not required. If no criminal proceedings are brought, samples taken under this section can only be retained until prosecution of the offence in question becomes time barred.
Under section 277, the judicial police are authorised to collect biological material for DNA analysis in order to identify persons or objects or if it is in the interest of the proceedings. The judicial police can also take samples for DNA analysis from suspects in accordance with section 249(3) of the Act. In order to establish the origin of traces on certain objects, the police can collect biological material for DNA analysis from persons who are likely to have come into contact with those objects.
Sections 6 and 7 of the Rules set out the powers of the police to establish the identity of a person who is suspected of committing a crime. The identity of an individual can be established, inter alia, on the basis of a DNA sample. Identification of a person who is not suspected of committing a crime on the basis of DNA analysis can be made only if he or she has consented in writing.
The 2014 Instruction provides that the Forensics Bureau within the Ministry of the Interior is to keep records of DNA profiles (section 3). It specifies that the arresting officer is to apply to register a person in the forensic records. In so doing, the officer can, inter alia, take biological material from that person for DNA analysis (section 9). The DNA samples are to be stored in special containers approved by the Forensics Bureau (section 20) and kept in a refrigerator for a maximum of seven days before they are sent to the Forensics Bureau. On expiry of that time-limit, a new sample is to be taken. Samples which are not submitted to the Forensics Bureau within the specified time-limit are to be destroyed by the Bureau (section 21). The 2014 Instruction further specifies the procedure for DNA analysis and access to records of DNA profiles. The 2014 Instructions set aside the 2009 Instruction, which contained no provisions regarding the collection, processing or storage of DNA material.
By a decision of 11 June 2010 the Directorate dismissed a complaint by a person who, like in the present cases, alleged that police officers had taken a mouth swab for compiling his DNA profile in violation of his privacy. In that decision the Directorate referred to a statement of a representative of the Ministry of the Interior that cellular material had never been taken in cases of suspected theft and aggravated theft (decision no. 0930/7).
The international materials relevant to the present case were described in the cases of S. and Marper v. the United Kingdom ([GC], nos. 30562/04 and 30566/04, §§ 41-44, ECHR 2008) and Gaughran v. the United Kingdom (no. 45245/15, §§ 50-52, 13 February 2020).
Concerning the retention of DNA profiles following a conviction for a minor criminal offence, it appears from information available to the Court that, of thirty Council of Europe member States other than the respondent State, three (Cyprus, Ireland and Montenegro) have indefinite retention periods. Twenty States have retention periods limited in time (Albania, Austria, Belgium, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Croatia, Denmark, Estonia, Finland, France, Hungary, Latvia, Lithuania, the Republic of Moldova, the Netherlands, Norway, Poland, Portugal, Spain, Sweden and Switzerland). It may also be noted that some of those states for example Belgium and Latvia do not provide for retention of data for ‘administrative’ offences, but only criminal offences. Of those twenty, seven have a defined retention period (either general, or for more serious offences) linked to the date of death of the convicted person (Bosnia and Herzegovina, Denmark, Finland, the Republic of Moldova, the Netherlands, Norway and Switzerland). Of those seven, the legislation of the Netherlands specifies the longest retention period of twenty years from the date of death for serious offences, with decreasing periods for less serious offences. Three member States (the Czech Republic, Germany and Malta) do not have specific retention periods but have various substantive limitations on the data retention and require periodic assessments to determine whether the substantive requirements for a prolonged retention are met. Four are without relevant regulation (San Marino, Georgia, Lichtenstein and Romania).
In general, the reasons for retention of the relevant personal data (DNA profiles, fingerprints, photographs) of convicted offenders relate to the necessity of crime prevention and effective investigation and prosecution of crime. The legislation in Austria also refers to the need to protect public security and in Ireland the need to retain data for intelligence purposes. The legislation in Sweden also refers to the fulfilment of obligations which follow from international commitments.
As to the existence of review mechanisms, the report finds that in six of the member States subject to the survey (Albania, Bosnia and Herzegovina, the Czech Republic, the Republic of Moldova, Norway and Poland) there is a possibility of an administrative or other similar specialised review of the necessity of the data retention. In eighteen (Austria, Belgium, Croatia, Cyprus, Finland, France, Georgia, Germany, Hungary, Ireland, Lithuania, Malta, Montenegro, Portugal, Romania, Spain, Sweden and Switzerland) there is a possibility of a judicial review, often coupled with a prior administrative review. In five States (Denmark, Estonia, Latvia, the Netherlands, Lichtenstein) there is no possibility of a review of the necessity of data retention. In San Marino, it would appear that there is no specific regulation on the matter.