The case originated in an application (no. 66448/17) against the Republic of Turkey lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Turkish national, Mr Hakan Baş (“the applicant”), on 30 January 2017.
The applicant was represented by Mr A. Benlahcen, a lawyer practising in Paris. The Turkish Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent.
The applicant alleged, in particular, that he had been deprived of his liberty in breach of Article 5 §§ 1 and 3 of the Convention and that the proceedings concerning his objections against his detention had not satisfied the requirements of Article 5 § 4 of the Convention.
On 19 June 2018 the Government were given notice of the complaints concerning Article 5 §§ 1, 3 and 4 of the Convention and the remainder of the application was declared inadmissible. The applicant and the Government each filed observations on the admissibility and merits of the case. In addition, third-party comments were received from the International Commission of Jurists (ICJ), which had been given leave by the President to intervene in the written procedure (Article 36 § 2 of the Convention and Rule 44 § 3 of the Rules of Court).
The applicant was born in 1978 and lives in Kocaeli.
During the night of 15 to 16 July 2016 a group of members of the Turkish armed forces calling themselves the “Peace at Home Council” attempted to carry out a military coup aimed at overthrowing the democratically installed National Assembly, government and President of Turkey.
During the coup attempt, the instigators, using fighter planes and helicopters, bombarded several strategic State buildings, including the National Assembly building and the presidential compound, as well as the police special operations command and the secret services headquarters, attacked the hotel where the President of Turkey was staying, held the Chief of General Staff hostage, attacked and occupied a number of institutions, including Türksat (a Turkish satellite telecommunications operator in Ankara), occupied television channels, sealed off bridges over the Bosphorus and Istanbul Airport and fired shots at demonstrators. During the night of violence, 251 people were killed and 2,194 were injured.
The day after the attempted military coup, the national authorities blamed the network linked to Fetullah Gülen, a Turkish citizen living in Pennsylvania (United States of America) and considered to be the leader of an organisation referred to by the Turkish authorities as “FETÖ/PDY” (“Gülenist Terror Organisation/ Parallel State Structure”).
On 16 July 2016 the Bureau for Crimes against the Constitutional Order at the Ankara public prosecutor’s office initiated a criminal investigation.
In instructions issued to the Directorate General of Security on the same day, the Ankara Chief Public Prosecutor noted that the offence of attempting to overthrow the government and the constitutional order by force was still ongoing and that there was a risk that members of the FETÖ/PDY terrorist organisation who were suspected of committing the offence in question might flee the country. He asked the Directorate General of Security to contact all the regional authorities with a view to taking into police custody all the judges and public prosecutors whose names were listed in the appendix to the instructions – among them the applicant – and to ensure that they were brought before a public prosecutor to be placed in pre-trial detention under Article 309 § 2 of the Criminal Code (CC).
During and after the coup attempt, acting on the instructions of the Ankara public prosecutor’s office, regional and provincial prosecutors’ offices initiated criminal investigations in respect of individuals suspected of being involved in the attempt and others who were not directly involved but were alleged to have links to the FETÖ/PDY organisation, including certain members of the judiciary.
On 20 July 2016 the government declared a state of emergency for a period of three months as from 21 July 2016; the state of emergency was subsequently extended for further periods of three months by the Council of Ministers.
On 21 July 2016 the Turkish authorities gave notice to the Secretary General of the Council of Europe of a derogation from the Convention under Article 15 (for the contents of the notice, see paragraph 109 below).
During the state of emergency, the Council of Ministers passed several legislative decrees under Article 121 of the Constitution (see paragraph 52 below). One of them, Legislative Decree no. 667, published in the Official Gazette on 23 July 2016, provided in Article 3 that the Council of Judges and Prosecutors (Hakimler ve Savcılar Kurulu – “the HSK”) was authorised to dismiss any judges or prosecutors who were considered to belong or be affiliated or linked to terrorist organisations or organisations, structures or groups found by the National Security Council to have engaged in activities harmful to national security.
On 18 July 2018 the state of emergency was lifted.
On 16 July 2016 the 3rd Chamber of the HSK noted that, in accordance with the instructions of the Ankara Chief Public Prosecutor, a criminal investigation had been initiated in respect of judges and prosecutors suspected of being members of FETÖ/PDY. It decided to submit a proposal to the chairman of the HSK to approve the opening of an investigation, to be carried out by an inspector from the HSK, in accordance with section 82 of Law no. 2802 on judges and prosecutors (“Law no. 2802”).
On the same day, the 2nd Chamber of the HSK held an extraordinary meeting. It noted that the proposal by the 3rd Chamber to approve an investigation had been accepted by the chairman of the HSK and that the presidency of the Inspection Board of the Ministry of Justice had appointed a chief inspector. On the basis of the report drawn up by the chief inspector, the 2nd Chamber of the HSK suspended 2,735 judges and prosecutors – including the applicant – from their duties for a period of three months, pursuant to sections 77(1) and 81(1) of Law no. 2802, on the grounds that there was strong suspicion that they were members of the terrorist organisation that had instigated the attempted coup and that keeping them in their posts would hinder the progress of the investigation and undermine the authority and reputation of the judiciary. Its decision was based on information and documents in the investigation files that it had been sent prior to the coup attempt and on information obtained following research by the intelligence services.
In reaching its 669-page decision, the 2nd Chamber of the HSK had regard to the following: information and documents sent by the Ankara public prosecutor’s office; the activities of the judges and prosecutors concerned during their training; information about their attendance of in-service and external training courses; information about their appointment to special courts and public prosecutors’ offices or to administrative posts requiring special authorisation, and the criteria taken into consideration for that purpose; and information relating to appointments within the Inspection Board of the Ministry of Justice or the administrative authorities. The 2nd Chamber of the HSK also had regard to: information and documents in the judges’ and prosecutors’ personnel files (özlük dosyası); their posts on social media; complaints and reports to the HSK about them, and the investigation files produced and decisions issued as a result; acts carried out by the judges and prosecutors responsible for cases relating to FETÖ/PDY and any decisions delivered in that context; and lastly, disciplinary files concerning investigations it had conducted in respect of the judges and prosecutors with links to FETÖ/PDY.
In its decision the 2nd Chamber of the HSK mentioned detailed information about the activities of FETÖ/PDY within the judicial system, concerning in particular: the organisation’s strategy within the judiciary; the hierarchical structure among the judges and prosecutors belonging to the organisation; action taken by the organisation against judges and prosecutors not belonging to it, in particular the opening of illegal disciplinary investigations by inspectors; the links between judges and prosecutors belonging to the organisation; the financial support provided to the organisation; the conduct of certain members of the organisation; activities carried out to ensure the selection of organisation members for posts at the highest courts and other prominent positions within the judiciary; unlawful investigations and proceedings conducted by members of the organisation for the purpose of supplanting the judiciary and the State administrative authorities; instructions received by judges and prosecutors belonging to the organisation from their superiors in the organisation in delivering their decisions; activities carried out by the organisation to infiltrate the judges’ and prosecutors’ trade union; and the use of the ByLock messaging system by judges and prosecutors belonging to the organisation.
In its decision the 2nd Chamber of the HSK also provided detailed information about the unlawful activities uncovered during the disciplinary investigations initiated in respect of judges and prosecutors with links to FETÖ/PDY (pages 246-436 of the decision).
Furthermore, on pages 437-535 of its decision, the 2nd Chamber of the HSK referred to posts on social media discovered in the course of the disciplinary investigations carried out in respect of the judges and prosecutors suspected of belonging to the organisation, praising acts and actions carried out by suspected members of the organisation.
On 24 August 2016, applying Article 3 of Legislative Decree no. 667, the plenary HSK dismissed 2,847 judges and prosecutors – including the applicant – considered to be members of or affiliated or linked to FETÖ/PDY.
In addition to the material referred to in the decision of 16 July 2016, the HSK considered evidence such as messages exchanged via the encrypted messaging systems used by the organisation’s members, statements taken from judges and prosecutors during the investigations in respect of them, and statements by informers. The HSK found that the position of the judges and prosecutors concerned within structures that were incompatible with the principles of independence and impartiality and their activities within the organisation’s hierarchy, coupled with their underlying sense of allegiance, were likely to undermine the reputation and authority of the judiciary. It held that the fact that judges and prosecutors obeyed the instructions of a hierarchical structure outside the State apparatus represented a genuine obstacle to the right of citizens to a fair trial.
On 29 November 2016 the plenary HSK rejected an application by the applicant for a review of the decision to dismiss him.
On 16 July 2016, in the context of the investigation opened by the Ankara public prosecutor’s office, the Kocaeli public prosecutor initiated a criminal investigation in respect of the judges serving in Kocaeli suspected of being members of FETÖ/PDY.
On 18 July 2016 the applicant was placed under police supervision at the hospital where he had been admitted for treatment.
Also on 18 July 2016, the Kocaeli 1st Magistrate’s Court decided, on the basis of Article 153 § 3 of the Code of Criminal Procedure (CCP), to restrict the applicant’s and his lawyer’s access to the investigation file in order to avoid hindering the progress of the investigation.
On 19 July 2016 the applicant left hospital to give evidence to the Kocaeli public prosecutor. The prosecutor informed him that he had been suspended from his duties as a result of the HSK’s decision of 16 July 2016, on the grounds of his suspected membership of FETÖ/PDY. The applicant denied being a member of or having any links with that organisation. His lawyer stated that neither he nor his client knew on what evidence he had been accused of the offence in question.
Later on 19 July 2016, at about 9 p.m., the applicant was brought before the Kocaeli 1st Magistrate’s Court. On that occasion he reiterated the statement he had given to the public prosecutor and complained that no evidence whatsoever had been produced to substantiate the accusations against him.
Following questioning, on 20 July 2016 the magistrate decided to place the applicant in pre-trial detention on suspicion of membership of a terrorist organisation. He noted that the coup attempt was still ongoing, that the applicant had been suspended from his duties by the HSK on the grounds that he was a member of the organisation that had instigated the attempted coup, and that the HSK had asked for an investigation to be opened by the Bureau for Crimes against the Constitutional Order at the Ankara public prosecutor’s office. The magistrate took into consideration the nature of the alleged offence, the state of the evidence and the potential sentence. He also noted that investigations into the coup attempt were being conducted across the country, that statements had not yet been taken from all the suspects and that the alleged offence was among the “catalogue” offences listed in Article 100 § 3 of the CCP. The judge held that detention appeared to be a proportionate measure at that stage and that judicial supervision would be insufficient. Lastly, he found that there was a situation of discovery in flagrante delicto governed by section 94 of Law no. 2802.
In addition, he held that it was unnecessary to detain the applicant in connection with the offence of attempting to overthrow the constitutional order.
On 29 July 2016 the Kocaeli 2nd Magistrate’s Court dismissed an objection by the applicant against the order for his detention, on the same grounds as those put forward in the original order. On that occasion the magistrate did not seek the opinion of the public prosecutor.
On 19 August 2016 the Kocaeli 1st Magistrate’s Court, in the course of its automatic periodic review of the detention of several suspects, ruled on applications for release submitted by the applicant on 4 and 9 August 2016, thus acting in accordance with paragraph 1 (ç) of Article 3 of Legislative Decree no. 668 (see paragraph 81 below). The magistrate observed that the public prosecutor had requested a review of the detention under Article 108 of the CCP and had sought its continuation. He also noted that many of the individuals suspected of being members of FETÖ/PDY had absconded and were still wanted. In view of the resources available to FETÖ/PDY and the nature of the organisation, there was a risk not only of absconding but also of collusion and reoffending. The magistrate also emphasised the serious nature of the alleged offence and the fact that not all the evidence had yet been gathered, and found that the decision to detain the applicant had been consistent with the information, documents and evidence in the investigation file. He added that there was still a clear and present danger associated with the attempted coup. Detention appeared to be a proportionate measure at that stage, and judicial supervision would be insufficient. Accordingly, the magistrate upheld the public prosecutor’s request and ordered the applicant’s continued pre-trial detention.
On 7 September 2016 the Kocaeli 2nd Magistrate’s Court, in the course of its automatic periodic review of detention, considered an application for release submitted by the applicant on 22 August 2016, thus acting in accordance with paragraph 1 (ç) of Article 3 of Legislative Decree no. 668. The magistrate observed that the public prosecutor had requested a review of the detention under Article 108 of the CCP and had sought its continuation. He upheld the public prosecutor’s request, which also concerned thirty-two other suspects. The magistrate relied mainly on the same grounds as in his previous decision of 29 July 2016. He pointed out that as the suspects were former judges and prosecutors, there was a risk that they might attempt to exert influence or pressure on serving judges and prosecutors. He also dismissed the suspects’ objections to the application of section 94 of Law no. 2802, and held that this was a case of discovery in flagrante delicto.
On 26 September 2016 the Kocaeli 2nd Magistrate’s Court dismissed an objection by the applicant against the decision of 19 August 2016 to continue his detention, relying mainly on the same grounds as in its previous decisions. On that occasion the magistrate did not seek the opinion of the public prosecutor.
On 27 September 2016 the Kocaeli public prosecutor’s office forwarded the file to the Ankara public prosecutor’s office.
On 10 October 2016, following an automatic review of the detention of several suspects, including the applicant, the Ankara 2nd Magistrate’s Court ordered their continued pre-trial detention. The magistrate explained that the independence and impartiality of the judiciary sought to protect the fundamental values of a democratic society, that these were universal and modern values, and that the general principles of law included a prohibition on abuses of rights and abuses of power. He added that when the judiciary was used in such a way as to be diverted from its true function and purpose, the justice system risked losing its legitimacy. There had been an attempted uprising against the democratic regime, as attested by reports from various authorities and the decision by the HSK, and specific facts giving rise to strong suspicion had been established. Furthermore, the offences of which the suspects were accused were among the “catalogue offences” listed in Article 100 § 3 of the CCP. In addition, the evidence and suspicion needed for a detention order to be made at the investigation stage was not of the same nature or scale as was required to reach a finding of guilt beyond reasonable doubt at the trial stage, and it was therefore unnecessary, when ordering pre-trial detention, to have the proof that would be needed to establish guilt. There was a risk of absconding given the nature of the alleged offence and the potential sentence, and at the start of the investigation stage there was also a risk of tampering with evidence. The magistrate therefore concluded that judicial supervision would be insufficient and that detention was not a disproportionate measure.
On 14 October 2016 the Ankara 8th Magistrate’s Court, in the course of its automatic review of detention, considered applications for release submitted by certain suspects. The magistrate observed that the public prosecutor had requested a review of the detention under Article 108 of the CCP and had sought its continuation for the thirty-three suspects concerned, among them the applicant. The magistrate upheld the public prosecutor’s request and ordered the continued pre-trial detention of the suspects. He stated that the file contained evidence that the suspects had committed the alleged offence and again referred to the risk of absconding, tampering with evidence and reoffending. He also mentioned the nature of the alleged offence and the fact that it was a “catalogue” offence, and held that detention was a proportionate measure.
On 7 November and 5 December 2016 and 6 January 2017 the Ankara magistrates’ courts conducted automatic reviews of the detention of thirty suspects, including the applicant, and decided to extend the measure on the same grounds as referred to previously.
On 26 December 2016 the applicant lodged an individual application with the Constitutional Court. In it he complained that he had been detained in breach of the procedural safeguards afforded to judges in domestic law, that he could not reasonably be suspected of having committed the offence in question and that the reasons given for his detention had been insufficient. He argued that neither the order for his detention nor the decisions extending it had referred to any evidence of a reasonable suspicion that he had committed the alleged acts and that the grounds for his detention were neither relevant nor sufficient. He also contended that there had been a breach of the principle of equality of arms because of the lack of a hearing during the review of his detention, the non-disclosure of the public prosecutor’s opinion and the restriction of access to the investigation file. Lastly, he complained that the magistrates deciding on his detention had been neither independent nor impartial and had lacked jurisdiction to rule on the matter.
On 27 December 2017 the Constitutional Court declared the application inadmissible, finding that the applicant’s complaints were manifestly ill-founded.
Examining the lawfulness of the applicant’s initial pre-trial detention, the Constitutional Court held that, according to the indictment, he was a user of the ByLock messaging application. Bearing in mind the features of that application, it was acceptable that its use or installation with a view to use should have been treated by the investigating authorities as evidence of a link to FETÖ/PDY. It referred in that connection to its Aydın Yavuz and Others judgment, delivered on 20 June 2017. For that reason, in view of the features of the messaging software in question, the Constitutional Court found that the investigating authorities or courts that had ordered the applicant’s detention could not be said to have pursued a groundless and arbitrary approach in accepting that his use of the application could, in the circumstances of the case, be regarded as “strong evidence” of the commission of the offence of membership of FETÖ/PDY. In addition, having regard to the reasons mentioned in the decisions ordering the detention and dismissing the applicant’s subsequent objection, the Constitutional Court held it could not be maintained that no reasons had been given for the detention or that it was a disproportionate measure.
As regards the complaint that no hearing had been held during the review of the applicant’s detention, the Constitutional Court saw no reason to depart from its finding in the Aydın Yavuz and Others judgment that the lack of a hearing during the review of detention over a period of approximately nine months had not infringed the right to liberty and security, viewed in the light of Article 15 of the Constitution.
As to the restriction of access to the investigation file, the Constitutional Court found, after examining the records of questioning, the detention orders, the objections by the applicant or his lawyer against his detention, and the documents and information in the investigation file, that the applicant had been informed of the material forming the main basis for his detention, that he had had sufficient knowledge of its contents and that he had been given an opportunity to challenge his detention.
The Constitutional Court noted that the applicant had also argued that the magistrates were neither independent nor impartial and that their examination of his objections had deprived him of an effective remedy in respect of his detention. It observed that it had examined similar complaints in a number of other cases and, in view of the structural characteristics of the magistrates’ courts as an institution, had declared the complaints manifestly ill-founded. After citing its leading judgments in this area, the Constitutional Court found that there was no reason to reach a different conclusion in the applicant’s case.
The Constitutional Court also declared inadmissible the complaint that certain procedural safeguards attached to the status of judges or prosecutors had not been observed, and the complaint that the magistrates’ courts lacked jurisdiction to order detention. It held that, having regard to the nature of the alleged offence and the manner in which it had been committed, it had been appropriate to accept the jurisdiction of the magistrates who had ordered the applicant’s detention, and that there had been no error of assessment or any arbitrariness. The Constitutional Court referred to the conclusions set out in its previous judgments (Mustafa Başer and Metin Özçelik, application no. 2015/7908, 20 January 2016, and Süleyman Bağrıyanık and Others, application no. 2015/9756, 16 November 2016; see paragraphs 101-03 below).
On 6 January 2017 Legislative Decree no. 680 came into force, amending the rules on territorial jurisdiction laid down in section 93 of Law no. 2802. Following the amendment, the Ankara public prosecutor’s office transferred the case to the Istanbul public prosecutor’s office.
On 7 February, 8 March, 4 April, 3 May and 31 May 2017, various Istanbul magistrates’ courts reviewed the applicant’s detention and ordered its extension. During the review of his detention on 4 April 2017, the Istanbul 10th Magistrate’s Court relied on a police report about the ByLock messaging application (entitled “ByLock CBS Sorgu Raporu”), drawn up by the Anti-Smuggling and Organised Crime Department (“the KOM”), which named the applicant as a ByLock user.
On 9 June 2017 the applicant was charged with membership of a terrorist organisation under Article 314 § 2 of the Criminal Code and section 5 of the Prevention of Terrorism Act (Law no. 3713).
On 19 June 2017 the Istanbul 29th Assize Court accepted the indictment, and the trial subsequently began in that court. The 29th Assize Court ordered the applicant’s continued pre-trial detention, and instructed the Directorate General of Security and the KOM to provide more detailed information about his use of ByLock. An objection lodged against that decision was dismissed.
On 14 July, 11 August and 8 September 2017 the 29th Assize Court ordered the applicant’s continued pre-trial detention in the context of its automatic review of the detention.
Objections were lodged against the three decisions adopted by the court, but were all dismissed. In examining the objections, the judges relied not only on the applicant’s use of the ByLock messaging application but also on statements by a witness, C.U., to the effect that the applicant was a member of FETÖ/PDY.
On 19 September 2017 the 29th Assize Court held its first hearing on the merits of the case, following which it ordered the applicant’s continued pre-trial detention. During the hearing, in which he took part via the SEGBİS sound and image information system (Ses ve Görüntü Bilişim Sistemi), the applicant stated that the police report on ByLock had been included in the file some eight months after he had first been detained and that the prosecution had not produced any concrete evidence at the time of his initial detention. Following the second hearing, held on 25 October 2017 and attended by the applicant, the 29th Assize Court again ordered his continued pre-trial detention, relying mainly on his use of ByLock and the evidence given by C.U. At the hearing, the applicant submitted that the Istanbul Assize Court lacked jurisdiction ratione materiae and ratione loci to try his case. Arguing that the case concerned an offence committed in connection with or in the course of his official duties, he submitted that the subject matter fell within the jurisdiction of the Court of Cassation. In the event that his alleged offence had been treated as a personal offence within the meaning of section 93 of Law no. 2802, he contended the court with territorial jurisdiction would have been the Kocaeli Assize Court. The 29th Assize Court dismissed the objection.
During the trial, the 29th Assize Court carried out regular reviews of the applicant’s detention and ordered its extension.
At the end of the last hearing, held on 19 March 2018, the 29th Assize Court found the applicant guilty of the offence with which he was charged (membership of an armed terrorist organisation), sentenced him to seven years and six months’ imprisonment and, taking into account the period already spent in detention, ordered his release. In reaching its decision, the Assize Court relied on the applicant’s use of the ByLock application. It observed that between 21 September 2014 and 17 October 2014 he had logged on to the ByLock server on fifty occasions, as had been confirmed by an inspection of base-station data, which had established that the communications had taken place. It also relied on the statement by C.U. about the applicant’s membership of the organisation in question: the witness had stated that he and the applicant had worked at the same court, that they had been divided into two groups formed by the organisation and that, during the election of members of the HSK, the applicant had campaigned to secure votes for the organisation’s candidate.
The applicant’s conviction was upheld on appeal.
The case is currently pending before the Court of Cassation.
The relevant parts of the provisions of the Constitution pertaining to the present case read as follows:
Article 15
“In the event of war, general mobilisation, a state of siege or a state of emergency, the exercise of fundamental rights and freedoms may be partially or fully suspended, or measures derogating from the guarantees enshrined in the Constitution [in relation to those rights and freedoms] may be taken to the extent required by the situation, provided that obligations under international law are not violated.
Even in the circumstances listed in the first paragraph, there shall be no violation of: the individual’s right to life, except where death occurs as a result of acts compatible with the law of war; the right to physical and spiritual integrity; freedom of religion, conscience and thought or the rule that no one may be compelled to reveal his or her beliefs or blamed or accused on account of them; the prohibition of retrospective punishment; or the presumption of the accused’s innocence until a final conviction.”
Article 19
“Everyone has the right to personal liberty and security.
...
Individuals against whom there are strong presumptions of guilt may be detained only by order of a judge and for the purposes of preventing their absconding or the destruction or alteration of evidence, or in any other circumstances provided for by law that also necessitate their detention. No one shall be arrested without an order by a judge except when caught in flagrante delicto or where a delay would have a harmful effect; the conditions for such action shall be determined by law.
...
Everyone who is deprived of his or her liberty for any reason whatsoever shall be entitled to apply to a competent judicial authority for a speedy decision on his or her case and for his or her immediate release if the detention is not lawful. ...”
Article 121 (repealed on 21 January 2017)
“... During the state of emergency, the Council of Ministers, chaired by the President of the Republic, may issue legislative decrees on matters necessitated by the state of emergency. ...”
Article 138
“In the performance of their duties, judges shall be independent; they shall give judgment, according to their personal conviction, in accordance with the Constitution, statute and the law.
No organ, authority, office or individual may give orders or instructions to courts or judges relating to the exercise of judicial power, send them circulars, or make recommendations or suggestions.
No questions may be asked, debates held, or statements made in the legislative assembly with respect to the exercise of judicial power in the context of an ongoing trial.
The bodies of executive and legislative power and the authorities must comply with court decisions; they cannot in any circumstances modify court decisions or defer enforcement thereof.”
Article 139
“Judges and public prosecutors shall not be removed from office or compelled to retire without their consent before the age prescribed by the Constitution; nor shall they be deprived of their salaries, allowances or other rights attaching to their status, even as a result of the abolition of a court or post.
Exceptions shall be permitted in the case of judges or prosecutors who have been convicted of an offence requiring their dismissal, those whose unfitness to carry out their duties for medical reasons has been conclusively established or those whose continued service has been judged undesirable.”
The same principles of the independence of the judiciary and the irremovability of judges are enshrined in Article 140 of the Constitution.
The constitutional principles of independence are reproduced in legislation; for example, Law no. 2802 on judges and prosecutors specifies that judges and public prosecutors perform their functions in accordance with the principles of the independence of the courts and the irremovability of judges, and that no organ, authority or individual may give orders or instructions to the courts concerning the exercise of judicial power. The legislation states clearly that any act undermining the autonomy and independence of the courts and the judiciary is prohibited. Furthermore, Article 277 of the Criminal Code makes it a criminal offence to attempt to “influence persons vested with judicial powers”.
Article 142
“The formation of the courts, their duties and powers, their functioning and proceedings before them shall be governed by law.”
Article 159
(as in force at the material time)
“The High Council of Judges and Prosecutors shall be established and shall exercise its functions in accordance with the principles of the independence of the courts and the security of tenure of the judiciary.
The High Council of Judges and Prosecutors shall have a total of twenty-two members ...; it shall comprise three chambers.
The Minister of Justice shall be the chairman of the Council. The Under-Secretary of the Ministry of Justice shall be an ex officio member of the Council. Four titular members of the Council, whose qualifications shall be specified by law, shall be appointed by the President of Turkey from among the teaching staff in the field of law at higher education institutions and/or from among practising lawyers; three members ... shall be appointed by the plenary Court of Cassation from among the members of that court; two members ... shall be appointed by the plenary Supreme Administrative Court from among its members; one member ... shall be appointed by the general assembly of the Justice Academy of Turkey from among its members; seven members ... shall be elected from among the judges and public prosecutors of the first rank ... at the ordinary courts; three members ... shall be elected from among the judges and public prosecutors of the first rank ... at the administrative courts, for a term of four years. Members may be re-elected on the expiry of their term of office. ...”
Pursuant to a law of 21 January 2017, the “High Council of Judges and Prosecutors” became the “Council of Judges and Prosecutors”.
Article 309 § 1 of the Criminal Code is worded as follows:
“Anyone who attempts to overthrow by force and violence the constitutional order provided for by the Constitution of the Republic of Turkey or to establish a different order in its place, or de facto to prevent its implementation, whether fully or in part, shall be sentenced to aggravated life imprisonment.”
Article 312 § 1 of the Criminal Code, on crimes against the government, provides:
“Anyone who attempts to overthrow the Government of the Republic of Turkey by force and violence or to prevent it, whether fully or in part, from discharging its duties shall be sentenced to life imprisonment.”
Article 314 §§ 1 and 2 of the Criminal Code, which provides for the offence of membership of an illegal organisation, reads as follows:
“1.  Anyone who forms or leads an organisation with the purpose of committing the offences listed in the fourth and fifth parts of this chapter shall be sentenced to ten to fifteen years’ imprisonment.
Any member of an organisation referred to in the first paragraph above shall be sentenced to five to ten years’ imprisonment.”
The relevant parts of Article 2 of the CCP provide:
“The following shall be classified as cases of discovery in flagrante delicto (suçüstü):
an offence in the process of being committed;
an offence that has just been committed, and an offence committed by an individual who has been pursued immediately after carrying out the act and has been apprehended by the police, the victim or other individuals;
an offence committed by an individual who has been apprehended in possession of items or evidence indicating that the act was carried out very recently. ...”
Article 20 of the CCP provides:
“Acts carried out by a judge or court lacking territorial jurisdiction shall not be deemed null and void (hükümsüz) simply as a result of the lack of territorial jurisdiction.”
The relevant parts of Article 100 of the CCP, on grounds for detention, provide:
“1.  If there is concrete evidence giving rise to a strong suspicion that the [alleged] offence has been committed and to a ground for pre-trial detention, a detention order may be made in respect of a suspect or an accused. Pre-trial detention may only be ordered in proportion to the sentence or preventive measure that could potentially be imposed, bearing in mind the significance of the case.
In the cases listed below, a ground for pre-trial detention shall be presumed to exist:
For certain offences listed in Article 100 § 3 of the CCP (the so-called “catalogue offences”), there is a statutory presumption of the existence of grounds for detention.
Article 108 of the CCP, concerning the review of detention, reads as follows:
“1.  During the investigation phase [and] throughout the suspect’s detention, at intervals not exceeding thirty days, a magistrate shall, on an application by the public prosecutor [and] having regard to the provisions of Article 100, review whether continued detention is necessary, after hearing the suspect or the suspect’s lawyer.
A review of detention may also be requested by the suspect within the time indicated in the previous paragraph.
The judge or court shall automatically give a decision on whether the accused’s continued detention is necessary at each hearing or, if the circumstances so require, between hearings or within the time indicated in the first paragraph above.”
The relevant parts of Article 141 § 1 of the CCP provide:
“Compensation for damage ... may be claimed from the State by anyone ...
Article 161 § 8 of the CCP, governing the functions and powers of the public prosecutor, reads as follows:
“In the case of the offences referred to in Articles 302, 309, 311, 312, 313, 314, 315 and 316 of the Turkish Criminal Code, an investigation shall be directly initiated by a public prosecutor even if the alleged offence was committed in connection with or in the course of official duties. ...”
Section 35 of Law no. 2802, concerning appointments by transfer, reads as follows:
“Judges and public prosecutors, in accordance with the regulations of the Council of Judges and Prosecutors on appointments and transfers, shall be appointed within the same judicial district or in other districts to posts of equivalent or a higher level, with their acquired rights, salary level and rank.
Judicial districts for the ordinary and administrative courts shall be established according to geographical and economic characteristics, social, medical and cultural facilities, degree of isolation, accessibility and other features, and the term of office in each judicial district shall be determined accordingly.”
Sections 82-92 of Law no. 2802 lay down the rules applicable in relation to the investigation and prosecution of offences committed by judges and public prosecutors in connection with or in the course of their official duties. Section 93 of the Law concerns offences committed by judges and prosecutors in their personal capacity. Section 94 of the Law is a common provision covering both scenarios.
The relevant provisions of Law no. 2802 read as follows:
Section 82
“The opening of a preliminary examination (inceleme) or an investigation (soruşturma) in respect of judges and prosecutors for offences committed in connection with or in the course of their official duties, [and for] attitudes and conduct incompatible with their status and functions shall be subject to authorisation by the Ministry of Justice. The Ministry of Justice may entrust the preliminary examination or investigation to judicial inspectors or to a more senior judge or prosecutor than the person under investigation.”
Section 85
“At the investigation stage, applications for detention orders shall be considered and determined by the authority with jurisdiction to decide on the institution of criminal proceedings (son soruşturma açılmasına karar vermeye yetkili merci).”
Section 88
“(1)  Except for cases of discovery in flagrante delicto falling within the jurisdiction of the assize courts, judges and prosecutors suspected of committing an offence may not be arrested, subjected to a personal or home search or questioned. However, the Ministry of Justice shall be immediately informed of the situation.
(2) Where members and officers of the security forces act in breach of the provisions of the first subsection above, an investigation shall be conducted directly by the competent public prosecutor in accordance with the provisions of ordinary law and proceedings shall be instituted.”
Section 89
“Where the institution of criminal proceedings against judges or prosecutors for offences committed in connection with or in the course of their official duties is deemed necessary, the file shall be sent by the Ministry of Justice to the public prosecutor’s office at the closest assize court to the judicial district [in which the person concerned serves], or, [if the person is employed at one of the central departments of the Ministry of Justice or one of the bodies attached to it], to the Ankara public prosecutor’s office.
The public prosecutor shall draw up the indictment within five days and shall forward it to the assize court for a decision on whether or not to proceed to the trial stage.
...”
Section 93 (as in force prior to 2 January 2017)
“The investigation of personal offences (kişisel suçları) committed by judges and prosecutors shall be conducted by the chief public prosecutor at the closest assize court to the judicial district covering the assize court within whose jurisdiction the person concerned serves, and the trial shall be conducted by the assize court at the same location.”
Article 7 of Legislative Decree no. 680 of 2 January 2017 amended section 93 of Law no. 2802 as follows:
Section 93 (as in force since 2 January 2017)
“Jurisdiction to investigate and try personal offences (kişisel suçları) committed by judges and prosecutors shall be conferred [respectively] on the public prosecutor’s office and the assize court for the judicial district covering the court of appeal within whose jurisdiction the person concerned serves.”
Section 94
“In cases of discovery in flagrante delicto of ordinary offences within the jurisdiction of the assize courts, the preliminary investigation shall be conducted in accordance with the rules of ordinary law. The preliminary investigation shall be conducted in person by the competent public prosecutors.”
As regards Law no. 6087 on the HSK, some of its provisions were amended by Law no. 6524 of 15 February 2014, which conferred powers on the Minister of Justice, including the power to decide on the assignment of members within the three chambers of the HSK, to appoint the president and vice-president of the Inspection Board of the Ministry of Justice, to initiate a disciplinary investigation and to allow the opening of an investigation into members of the HSK.
In a judgment of 10 April 2014 (E.2014/57-K.2014/81), published in the Official Gazette on 14 May 2014, the plenary Constitutional Court struck down some of the provisions of the new Law, including those concerning the transfer of the above-mentioned powers to the Minister of Justice, declaring them unconstitutional on account of their incompatibility with the principles of independence of the judiciary and the irremovability of judges. Since the Constitutional Court’s judgments do not have retroactive effect, any consequences that had in the meantime resulted from the provisions declared unconstitutional were not erased.
In a judgment of 19 February 2013 (E.2011/5-137, K.2013/58) the plenary criminal divisions of the Court of Cassation, ruling on the case of a judge accused of corruption in flagrante delicto, stated that sections 82-92 of Law no. 2802 concerned offences linked to the status of judges and prosecutors.
The criminal magistrates’ courts were established by Law no. 6545 of 18 June 2014, which came into force on 28 June 2014, amending section 10 of Law no. 5235 on the organisation of the courts. The criminal courts of first instance were abolished and their powers in relation to preventive measures at the investigation stage were transferred to the criminal magistrates’ courts.
Section 10 of Law no. 5235 on the organisation of the courts, as amended by section 34 of Law no. 6545, reads as follows, in so far as relevant:
“Except in cases where additional powers have been conferred by law, the criminal magistrates’ courts shall be established to take decisions and measures requiring judicial intervention at the investigation stage and to examine objections against them.
Several criminal magistrates’ courts may be established in places where the caseload so requires. In that event, the magistrates’ courts shall each be assigned a number. Judges appointed to magistrates’ courts may not be transferred to other courts or assigned other duties by the justice commission for the judicial district (adli yargı adalet komisyonlarınca). ...”
According to the general explanatory memorandum on Law no. 6545, as submitted to the National Assembly by the Ministry of Justice’s Directorate General of Legislation, the replacement of the criminal courts of first instance by magistrates’ courts was designed, firstly, to end the dual system of first-instance courts in criminal matters (criminal courts of first instance and criminal courts) and, secondly, to introduce specialisation regarding preventive measures. The criminal courts of first instance had previously been responsible for a considerable variety of tasks in addition to their judicial function. The tasks in question were not taken into account for the purpose of judges’ career progression but were regarded as ancillary and little attention was paid to them as a result. The magistrates’ courts were therefore established to take decisions requiring judicial intervention at the investigation stage. In this way, the purpose of the new legislation was to promote specialisation regarding preventive measures and to ensure more effective protection of fundamental rights and freedoms.
According to the specific explanations given for the provision amending section 10 of Law no. 5235 on the organisation of the courts, the fact that there were no judges with special responsibility for preventive measures had given rise to differing practices and operational problems, and there had also been strong criticism of the insufficient reasons given in decisions on preventive measures, the lack of a uniform approach among courts and the fact that the judge who had made a detention order was subsequently required to determine the merits of the case. Thus, according to the specific explanations for the provision in question, the establishment of the magistrates’ courts would, above all, ensure that there was a degree of specialisation and harmonisation in the implementation of preventive measures. The aim pursued by the new provision was therefore, in due course, to achieve a countrywide standard for decisions on preventive measures by fostering interaction between magistrates’ courts.
In a judgment of 14 January 2015 (E.2014/164-K.2015/12), published in the Official Gazette on 22 May 2015, the plenary of the Constitutional Court dismissed a challenge to the constitutionality of certain provisions, namely section 10 of Law no. 5235 on the organisation of the courts and paragraph 3 (a) and (b) of Article 268 of the CCP, in the context of objections of unconstitutionality raised by the Eskişehir 1st Magistrate’s Court. In support of the objections, the magistrate in question had argued that the outcome of criminal investigations in Turkey was now left to the discretion of the political authorities, via a limited number of magistrates’ courts, and that this undermined the “natural judge” principle and the independence of the judiciary.
In its judgment the Constitutional Court noted that the magistrates’ courts had been established pursuant to Article 142 of the Constitution so that decisions requiring judicial intervention at the investigation stage could be taken by specialised judges. It also drew attention to the aim pursued by the magistrates’ courts as an institution, as set out in the general explanatory memorandum on Law no. 6545.
Next, the Constitutional Court stated that the “natural judge” principle could not be construed as prohibiting a newly established court or a judge recently appointed to an existing court from hearing a case concerning an offence committed prior to the establishment of the court or the judge’s appointment. It specified that unless the case was limited to a single event, person or group, the examination by a newly established court or a recently appointed judge of a case arising prior to the establishment or appointment in question did not constitute an infringement of the right to a lawfully established court. The Constitutional Court emphasised that to accept the contrary would effectively make it impossible to set up new courts within a country. After noting that the impugned rule had been applied, following its entry into force, to all disputes falling within its scope, the Constitutional Court found that the rule was not in breach of the “natural judge” principle.
In so far as the independence and impartiality of the magistrates’ courts had been challenged, the Constitutional Court, referring to the Court’s case-law, observed that the magistrates – like all other judges – were appointed by the HSK, that they enjoyed the safeguards afforded to judges and prosecutors by Article 139 of the Constitution, that they were not in a different position from other judges and prosecutors as regards independence, and that there was no evidence to support the view that the guarantee of their independence was diminished.
The Constitutional Court added that the magistrates could not be accused of a lack of objective impartiality, in view of the constitutional and legislative provisions governing the independence of judges and the guarantees as to their independence and impartiality. It held that there were sufficient safeguards available to ensure that magistrates acted entirely impartially when discharging their duties. Moreover, if any lack of impartiality on a magistrate’s part was established on the basis of concrete, objective and decisive evidence, procedural rules were in place that would disqualify the magistrate from dealing with the case in question.
As regards the challenge to the constitutionality of the objection procedure on the grounds that having an objection examined by another magistrate’s court would render that particular remedy ineffective, the Constitutional Court observed that the magistrates’ courts had jurisdiction to review the decision complained of and to determine the merits of the case, and that an objection was therefore an effective remedy. It added that there were no constitutional provisions requiring objections against magistrates’ decisions to be reviewed at a higher level of jurisdiction; provided that an effective review was secured, there was no obligation for the objection to be examined by a higher court. The Constitutional Court further noted that the different “divisions” of a particular court could not be regarded as forming a single court, and that arranging the courts in the same judicial district into “divisions” was an administrative decision relating to the organisation of the courts. Thus, the magistrate’s court examining an objection was to be seen as an independent and separate court from the magistrate’s court that had delivered the decision being challenged. Lastly, the Constitutional Court stated that having objections reviewed by judges with such a high degree of specialisation in preventive measures pursued a public-interest objective.
In another judgment, delivered on 8 April 2015, the Constitutional Court dismissed similar complaints raised in an individual application (Hikmet Kopar and Others, application no. 2014/14061). In support of their allegations of a lack of independence and impartiality on the part of the magistrates’ courts, the applicants had relied mainly on statements made by the executive, and in particular the Prime Minister. They had also submitted that a magistrate had shared comments praising the Prime Minister on social media and that judges who had ordered the release of individuals arrested during police operations conducted on 17 and 25 December 2013 had been appointed as magistrates. In its judgment the Constitutional Court noted that magistrates discharged their duties on the basis of general legislative provisions and following their appointment by the HSK. Accordingly, it held that in the absence of any proof of acts or conduct indicating prejudice against the applicants, it could not be accepted that facts whose existence and nature had not been convincingly established or comments made in the context of political debates constituted proof that the judges concerned had displayed a lack of independence and impartiality, for political or personal reasons.
Two successive legislative decrees, nos. 667 and 668, which came into force on 23 July 2016 and 27 July 2016 respectively, introduced amendments to certain investigative and procedural steps. Article 6, paragraph 1 (ı), of Legislative Decree no. 667 provides that the question of continued detention, objections against detention and applications for release “may” be examined on the basis of the file. Article 3, paragraph 1 (ç), of Legislative Decree no. 668 provides that applications from detainees to be released are to be examined on the basis of the file at the time of the automatic review carried out at thirty-day intervals in accordance with Article 108 of the CCP.
Section 13 of Law no. 7145, which was passed on 25 July 2018 and came into force on 31 July 2018, added a provisional section 19 to the Prevention of Terrorism Act (Law no. 3713), the relevant parts of which provide:
“Provisional section 19 – During a period of three years from the entry into force of this section, in relation to the offences defined in the Second Book, Fourth Part, Fourth, Fifth, Sixth and Seventh Chapters of Law no. 5237 instituting the Criminal Code and offences falling under the Prevention of Terrorism Act (Law no. 3713), or offences committed as part of an organisation’s activities:
...
(c) 1.  Objections against detention and applications for release may be examined on the basis of the file.
Applications for release may be examined on the basis of the file at intervals of no more than thirty days.
A review of detention in accordance with Article 108 of Law no. 5271 of 4 December 2004 instituting the Code of Criminal Procedure shall be carried out automatically at intervals of no more than thirty days on the basis of the file, and every ninety days after the [detainee] or his or her lawyer has been heard.”
In a judgment of 20 April 2015 (E.2015/1069, K.2015/840) the 16th Criminal Division of the Court of Cassation held as follows:
“... The offence of membership of an armed organisation is committed by means of voluntary submission to the organisation’s hierarchy and acceptance of the organisation’s founding aims and its activities ... Although the offence is completed by the act of joining the organisation, it continues to be committed throughout membership ...”
In a judgment of 6 April 2016 (E.2015/7367, K.2016/2130) the same Criminal Division of the Court of Cassation held as follows:
“The continuing nature of an offence ends at the time of the arrest. Where acts of a certain seriousness that are capable of [achieving] the organisation’s aims are carried out between the time of joining the organisation and the time of the arrest, consideration must be given both to the legal rules governing each of the offences and to the provisions governing the combination of offences ...”
In a judgment of 18 July 2017 (E.2016/7162, K.2017/4786) the same division held:
“... Membership of an organisation is punishable under Article 220 § 2 of the Criminal Code.
...
A member of an organisation is a person who adheres to the hierarchy [of the structure] and as a result submits to the will of the organisation by being ready to discharge the duties entrusted to him or her. [Membership of] an organisation means joining it, having a bond with it and submitting to its hierarchical authority. A member of the organisation must have an organic link with it and participate in its activities ...
Although it is not an essential prerequisite for punishment of a member of an organisation that the member has committed an offence in connection with the organisation’s activities and for the achievement of its aims, the individual must nevertheless have made a specific material or moral contribution to the organisation’s actual existence and moral reinforcement. As membership is a continuing offence, such acts must be of a certain intensity ...
The fact of belonging to the organisation, which constitutes a continuing offence, is treated as a single offence up to the termination of a legal and factual situation. Membership of the organisation ends with the individual’s arrest, the dissolution of the organisation, or the individual’s exclusion or departure from the organisation.
...
Offence of creating and being a member of a terrorist organisation:
For a structure to be classified as a terrorist organisation under Article 314 of the Criminal Code, in addition to satisfying the essential requirements for the existence of an organisation as set forth in Article 220 of the Criminal Code, the organisation must also be established with the aim of committing the offences [listed in certain chapters of the Criminal Code] ... and must also have access to sufficient weapons or the possibility of using them in order to achieve that aim ...”
In two other judgments delivered on 6 and 13 February 2017 by its 16th Criminal Division, the Court of Cassation reiterated the principle that membership of an armed terrorist organisation was a continuing offence and that the continuing nature of that offence ended at the time of arrest (E.2015/2361, K.2017/427 and E.2017/139, K.2017/785).
In a leading judgment delivered on 24 April 2017 (E.2015/3, K.2017/3) the 16th Criminal Division of the Court of Cassation, sitting as a first-instance court, found two judges, M.B. and M.M., guilty of being members of FETÖ/PDY and of abuse of power. In reaching its guilty verdict, the 16th Criminal Division relied on evidence including the defendants’ use of the ByLock messaging system. The 16th Criminal Division also addressed the argument raised by one of the two defendants concerning the jurisdiction of the Bakırköy 2nd Assize Court. It stated that Law no. 6526, which had added paragraph 8 to Article 161 of the CCP (see paragraph 64 above), did not contain any special provisions on the investigative measures that could be taken by a judge at the investigation stage and that as a result, in accordance with Law no. 2802 on judges and prosecutors as then in force, the Assize Court undoubtedly had jurisdiction.
In a judgment of 26 September 2017 (E. 2017/16-956, K. 2017/370) the plenary criminal divisions of the Court of Cassation upheld the judgment of the 16th Criminal Division. As to whether there was a case of discovery in flagrante delicto regarding the offence of membership of an armed organisation, the Court of Cassation held as follows:
“... as the current and consistent position of the Court of Cassation makes clear, regarding the offence of membership of an armed terrorist organisation, which is a continuing offence, except in cases where [its continuing nature ends with] the dissolution of the organisation or termination of membership, the continuing nature [of the offence] may be interrupted by the offender’s arrest. The time and place of the offence must therefore be established to that end. For this reason, there is a situation of discovery in flagrante delicto at the time of the arrest of judges suspected of the offence of membership of an armed organisation, and [consequently] the investigation must be carried out in accordance with the provisions of ordinary law ...”
The Court of Cassation also examined the applicants’ complaint that the indictment was unlawful. It observed that since Law no. 2802 did not contain detailed and clear provisions governing the different stages of the investigation and the proceedings, the question had to be settled on the basis of the CCP. Accordingly, it found that this matter was clearly dealt with in Article 1 of the CCP, which provides: “This Code governs the rules of criminal procedure and the rights, functions and duties of those taking part in this process.” It held that in the absence of any provisions to the contrary, the provisions of the CCP were applicable to investigations governed by a special procedure or to proceedings conducted by special judicial authorities.
On 10 October 2017 the plenary criminal divisions of the Court of Cassation delivered two judgments along similar lines to its judgment of 26 September 2017 on the issue of whether the offence of membership of an armed organisation was to be examined as a case of discovery in flagrante delicto (E. 2017/1000, K.2017/395 and E. 2017/1001, K.2017/396). Ruling on a case where judges had been accused of belonging to FETÖ/PDY, the Court of Cassation held that at the time of their arrest, there had been a situation of discovery in flagrante delicto for the purposes of section 94 of Law no. 2802. It noted that sections 82-92 of Law no. 2802 concerned offences linked to the official duties of judges and prosecutors but that the offence of which the applicants had been accused – membership of an illegal organisation – was a personal offence covered by section 93 of Law no. 2802. The trial court therefore had to be determined on the basis of that provision.
Case-law of the Constitutional Court
In its leading judgment in the case of Aydın Yavuz and Others, adopted unanimously, the Constitutional Court examined whether there was a reasonable suspicion that the applicants had committed the offence of which they were accused, namely attempting to overthrow the constitutional order. It held that, in view of the features of the ByLock application, its use by a person or its installation with a view to use could be treated by the investigating authorities as an indication of the existence of links between the person concerned and FETÖ/PDY. The Constitutional Court found that the strength of that indication could vary from case to case, depending on factors such as the person’s actual use of the application, the manner and frequency of such use, the position and importance of the contacts within FETÖ/PDY, and the content of messages exchanged via the application. Thus, in its view, bearing in mind the features of the messaging system in question, it could not be concluded that the investigating authorities or courts that had ordered the detention had pursued an unjustified or arbitrary approach in accepting, in the context of investigations relating to the attempted coup or to FETÖ/PDY, that the use of the application could, depending on the circumstances of the case, be regarded as “strong evidence” that the offence in question had been committed.
In its judgment the Constitutional Court also examined a complaint about the failure to hold a hearing for a period of eight months and eighteen days during the review of the applicants’ detention and concluded that this did not amount to a violation of Article 19 § 8 of the Constitution, read in conjunction with Article 15 of the Constitution, concerning the suspension of fundamental rights and freedoms during a state of emergency (a translation by the Constitutional Court of the relevant parts of its judgment is available on its website: ). After noting that in the light of its case-law, the lack of a hearing for a period of eight months and eighteen days was contrary to the requirements of Article 19 § 8 of the Constitution, the Constitutional Court considered it necessary to examine whether that situation was justified from the standpoint of Article 15 of the Constitution. It held that for the purposes of assessing the proportionality of the interference in question, consideration had to be given to the circumstances leading to the declaration of the state of emergency and the resulting conditions, and also to the period during which the applicants had been deprived of their liberty without being brought before a judge.
The Constitutional Court observed that, following the declaration of the state of emergency, a criminal investigation had been opened in respect of 162,000 people, more than 50,000 people had been detained in that context and more than 47,000 had been released subject to judicial supervision. The investigating authorities had therefore suddenly been required to initiate and conduct investigations in respect of tens of thousands of suspects because of this unexpected situation. The Constitutional Court further noted that, given the characteristics of the FETÖ/PDY organisation (confidentiality, cell-type structure, infiltration of all public institutions, self-professed holiness, and action based on obedience and devotion), investigations relating to it were more complex and difficult. In that context, the judicial and investigating authorities had had to handle an unforeseeable workload, and at the same time, more than 4,000 judges and prosecutors had been dismissed from office. Furthermore, various measures had been taken in the wake of the coup attempt, in particular to alleviate the serious situation facing the investigating and judicial authorities and to preserve the proper functioning of the justice system (arrangements had been made to increase the number of judges and prosecutors: shortening of the internship periods for trainee judges and prosecutors, administrative measures to recruit trainee judges and prosecutors, and reinstatement of judges and prosecutors who had previously retired or resigned).
The Constitutional Court emphasised that despite the restrictions on hearings introduced by Legislative Decrees nos. 667 and 668 during the state of emergency, detainees – including those involved in the attempted coup – still had the opportunity to apply to a judge for their release: under Article 104 of the CCP, they could apply for release at any stage of the investigation, and such applications were examined at the time of the automatic review every thirty days; furthermore, detainees were entitled to lodge objections against any decisions relating to their detention.
The Constitutional Court thus concluded that, having regard to the combined effect of the unforeseeably heavy workload with which the investigating and judicial authorities had been confronted after the coup attempt, the suspension and dismissal by the HSK of a considerable number of judges and prosecutors with links with FETÖ/PDY who would have been expected to deal with this workload and thus ensure the proper functioning of the judicial system (approximately one third of all judges and prosecutors), and the dismissal of a significant number of judicial support staff and law-enforcement officers who would have been involved in the conduct of the investigations and criminal proceedings, it had to be acknowledged that carrying out reviews on the basis of the case file alone, without holding a hearing, for individuals detained in connection with certain offences should be viewed as a proportionate measure required by the exigencies of the state of emergency.
The Constitutional Court further noted that a number of prison officers and gendarmerie personnel responsible for ensuring the safety and protection of prisoners, as well as a significant proportion of the police officers who could have been assigned to protect detainees if necessary, had been dismissed or suspended because of their links with terrorist organisations; the reduction in the number of these members of the security forces had been accompanied by an increase in the number of people detained on grounds linked to terrorist offences, resulting in prison overcrowding. Nor should it be overlooked that the transfer of tens of thousands of detainees to courthouses or other locations where they could be questioned via the SEGBİS sound and image information system in connection with the review of their detention would give rise to serious security problems. The Constitutional Court thus considered that conducting reviews of detention for the offences in question without holding a hearing had been necessary for the preservation of public safety in the context of the state of emergency declared following the coup attempt of 15 July 2016.
The Constitutional Court concluded that the continued detention of the applicants over a period of eight months and eighteen days on the basis of decisions given without a hearing had been “required by the exigencies of the situation”. Accordingly, the interference in issue, despite being contrary to the guarantees provided for in Article 19 § 8 of the Constitution, had complied with the criteria set forth in Article 15 of the Constitution.
In its Selçuk Özdemir judgment, adopted unanimously, the Constitutional Court for the first time examined the lawfulness of the pre-trial detention of a judge in connection with the attempted coup. Referring to the conclusion it had reached in its leading judgment in Aydın Yavuz and Others and reiterating the characteristics of the ByLock messaging application, it held that treating the use of ByLock or its installation with a view to use as a “strong indication” that the applicant had committed the offence of which he was accused (namely membership of FETÖ/PDY) could not be regarded, in the circumstances of the case and having regard to the features of ByLock, as an unjustified and arbitrary approach.
In its judgment the Constitutional Court stated that in the years leading up to the coup attempt, there had been a large number of investigations and prosecutions linked to FETÖ/PDY for the following offences: destruction of evidence; illegal interception of communications of State institutions and senior officials; disclosure of secret State activities; acquisition and disclosure of examination questions for entry to the civil service or for career advancement; and attempting to overthrow the government by force or prevent it from discharging its duties. The Constitutional Court added that on 16 June 2016, following a trial concerning FETÖ/PDY, the assize court dealing with the case had concluded that the organisation in question had built up structures within the armed forces, the police and the judicial institutions, that it had developed outside the State structure, and that it was an armed terrorist organisation. It further noted that the HSK had instituted disciplinary proceedings against several judges and prosecutors on account of irregularities committed in connection with the organisation and had ordered their dismissal.
The Constitutional Court added that from the summer of 2014 onwards, many judges and prosecutors widely believed to have links with FETÖ/PDY had been removed from posts regarded as important in the judicial system (chief and deputy chief public prosecutors, committee chairs, presidents of assize courts, presidents of commercial courts, judicial inspectors and judge rapporteurs) and assigned to other duties while retaining their status as judges or prosecutors.
The Constitutional Court also provided information about the number of judges and prosecutors who were under criminal investigation or had been dismissed. As of 24 July 2017, 4,664 judges and prosecutors were the subject of a criminal investigation, and 2,431 of them were currently in detention, the others having been released (in some cases under judicial supervision), having absconded or not having been the subject of a detention order. The Constitutional Court stated that the HSK had dismissed 2,847 judges and prosecutors on 24 August 2016, 543 on 31 August 2016, 66 on 4 October 2016, 203 on 15 November 2016, 227 on 13 February 2017, 202 on 17 March 2017, 45 on 3 April 2017 and 107 on 5 May 2017.
The Constitutional Court also described the structure of FETÖ/PDY within the judiciary.
In its Mehmet Hasan Altan judgment the Constitutional Court examined a complaint concerning the lawfulness of the detention of a journalist (see the Court’s judgment in Mehmet Hasan Altan v. Turkey, no. 13237/17, §§ 35-44, 20 March 2018). After examining the evidence forming the basis for the applicant’s pre-trial detention, it concluded that “strong evidence that an offence had been committed” had not been sufficiently established in the case before it. Next, the Constitutional Court examined whether there had been a violation of the right to liberty and security in the light of Article 15 of the Constitution. On this point, it noted firstly that in a state of emergency, the Constitution provided for the possibility of taking measures derogating from the guarantees set forth in Article 19, to the extent required by the situation. It observed, however, that if it were accepted that people could be placed in pre-trial detention without any strong evidence that they had committed an offence, the guarantees of the right to liberty and security would be meaningless. Accordingly, it held that the applicant’s pre-trial detention was disproportionate to the strict exigencies of the situation and concluded by a majority (eleven votes to six) that his right to liberty and security, as safeguarded by Article 19 § 3 of the Constitution, had been breached.
In its judgment in Mustafa Başer and Metin Özçelik, adopted by a majority (four votes to one), the Constitutional Court examined a complaint as to the jurisdiction of the Bakırköy 2nd Assize Court, which specialised in dealing with terrorist offences, and held that that court had jurisdiction under section 89 of Law no. 2802 to institute criminal proceedings and that accordingly it was entitled to order the applicants’ detention in accordance with section 85 of the same Law.
In its Süleyman Bağrıyanık and Others judgment, adopted unanimously, the Constitutional Court reviewed the lawfulness of the pre-trial detention of four public prosecutors suspected of offences committed in connection with their official duties. After the authorisation procedure under section 82 of Law no. 2802 had been initiated, the applicants had been placed in pre-trial detention by the Tarsus 2nd Assize Court. In response to the applicants’ complaint that that court, which specialised in dealing with terrorist offences, lacked jurisdiction and that the case should have been heard by the duty assize court, the Constitutional Court noted that the 2nd Assize Court had jurisdiction under section 89 of Law no. 2802 to institute criminal proceedings and that accordingly it was entitled to order the applicants’ detention under section 85 of the same Law.
In response to the applicants’ complaint under section 88 of Law no. 2802, the Constitutional Court observed that that Law did not contain any provisions prohibiting the adoption of preventive measures in respect of judges and prosecutors once the initiation of an investigation had been authorised in accordance with the procedure laid down in Law no. 2802. It noted that by the date of the applicants’ initial detention, the preliminary investigation procedure had been completed and permission to initiate a criminal investigation had been given. The Constitutional Court further noted that the Mersin Assize Court, which had examined an objection by the applicants against the order for their detention, had found that the prohibition in section 88(1) of Law no. 2802 related only to actions that could be taken by the security forces and did not preclude the judicial authorities from taking preventive measures. The Constitutional Court held that this interpretation and application of domestic law had been neither unreasonable nor arbitrary and that the applicants’ detention was therefore lawful.
In two judgments adopted on the same day by a majority (three votes to two) and published in the Official Gazette on 11 September 2019, the Constitutional Court ruled on the lawfulness of the pre-trial detention of two judges who had been suspended following a decision by the HSK on 16 July 2016 and subsequently dismissed on 24 August 2016. It concluded that the implementation of measures entailing suspension and/or dismissal could not in itself be regarded as proof of strong suspicion that the individuals concerned had committed the offence of which they were accused, namely membership of FETÖ/PDY. Nor did the other available evidence form a basis for such suspicion. Next, examining their complaint in the light of Article 15 of the Constitution, it held that if it were accepted that people could be placed in pre-trial detention without any strong evidence that they had committed an offence, the guarantees of the right to liberty and security would be meaningless. Accordingly, it found that the judges’ pre-trial detention was disproportionate to the exigencies of the situation and that their right to liberty and security, as safeguarded by Article 19 § 3 of the Constitution, had been breached.
The Government provided the following information and statistics about applications for release and objections lodged following the adoption of decisions relating to detention.
In 2016 59,001 applications for release were submitted; the magistrates’ courts granted 10,990 applications and ordered the release of the detainees concerned. In 2017 there were a total of 51,930 applications for release; 9,938 of them were granted and the detainees concerned were released. In 2018 (January to August) 17,549 applications for release were submitted and 4,318 of them led to a favourable outcome in the form of release.
In 2016 the number of objections lodged against decisions on detention reached a total of 450,596. Of these objections, 5,067 were upheld. In 2017 567,810 objections were lodged in respect of decisions on detention, and the magistrates’ courts upheld 4,645 of them. In 2018 (January to August) 249,841 objections were lodged, of which 2,325 led to a favourable outcome.
On 13 March 2017 the European Commission for Democracy through Law (Venice Commission) published an opinion (no. 852/2016) on the duties, competences and functioning of the criminal peace judgeships (magistrates’ courts). In the concluding part of its opinion, it stated that the jurisdiction and practice of the magistrates’ courts gave rise to concerns, and criticised the “system of horizontal appeals”. This part of the opinion reads as follows:
“101.  Peace judges are formally lawful judges and are appointed by a judicial council. However, upon close examination their jurisdiction and their practice give rise to numerous concerns.
The official purpose of establishing peace judgeships was to enable peace judges to devote sufficient time to the drafting of the reasoning of human rights sensitive matters. However, this goal was not implemented properly and the peace judges are bogged down with work not related to ‘protective measures’.
Another official purpose of establishing peace judgeships was to avoid that the same judge decide first on protective measures, then on the merits. According to this reason, it is difficult to understand why the criminal judgeships of peace are necessary at the investigation phase, while at the prosecution (trial) phase the same judge can take protective measures and then decide on the merits without being biased.
The system of horizontal appeals among a small number of peace judges within each region or courthouse is problematic, prevents the unification of case-law, establishes a closed system and cannot be justified with the need for specialisation.
There are numerous instances where peace judges did not sufficiently reason decisions which have a drastic impact on human rights of individuals. Their heavy workload does not leave them sufficient time to provide sufficiently individualised reasoning, notably in cases of detention and when shutting down Internet sites.
Therefore, the Venice Commission recommends:
On 21 July 2016 the Permanent Representative of Turkey to the Council of Europe sent the Secretary General of the Council of Europe the following notice of derogation:
“I communicate the following notice of the Government of the Republic of Turkey.
On 15 July 2016, a large-scale coup attempt was staged in the Republic of Turkey to overthrow the democratically-elected government and the constitutional order. This despicable attempt was foiled by the Turkish state and people acting in unity and solidarity. The coup attempt and its aftermath together with other terrorist acts have posed severe dangers to public security and order, amounting to a threat to the life of the nation in the meaning of Article 15 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms.
The Republic of Turkey is taking the required measures as prescribed by law, in line with the national legislation and its international obligations. In this context, on 20 July 2016, the Government of the Republic of Turkey declared a State of Emergency for a duration of three months, in accordance with the Constitution (Article 120) and the Law No. 2935 on State of Emergency (Article 3/1b). ...
The decision was published in the Official Gazette and approved by the Turkish Grand National Assembly on 21 July 2016. Thus, the State of Emergency takes effect as from this date. In this process, measures taken may involve derogation from the obligations under the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms, permissible in Article 15 of the Convention.
I would therefore underline that this letter constitutes information for the purposes of Article 15 of the Convention. The Government of the Republic of Turkey shall keep you, Secretary General, fully informed of the measures taken to this effect. The Government shall inform you when the measures have ceased to operate.
...”
The notice of derogation was withdrawn on 8 August 2018, following the end of the state of emergency.