The case originated in an application (no. 34907/05) against the  lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Polish national, Mr Leszek Hinczewski (“the applicant”), on 18 September 2005.
The applicant was represented by Mr J. Zaleski, a lawyer practising in . The Polish Government were represented by their Agent, Mr J. Wołąsiewicz, of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs.
The applicant alleged, in particular, that he was prevented from voting in the 2005 Parliamentary Elections in .
On 6 November 2007 the Court decided to give notice of the application to the Government. It also decided to examine the merits of the application at the same time as its admissibility (Article 29 § 3).
The applicant was born in 1971 and lives in Jastrzębie Zdrój.
The facts of the case, as submitted by the applicant, may be summarised as follows.
On 2 May 1990 the applicant was arrested by the police and detained on remand.
On 31 May 1991 the  (Sąd Wojewódzki) convicted the applicant of homicide and sentenced him to twelve years' imprisonment and a fine, to be paid to a charity. The court also sentenced the applicant to four years' deprivation of his civic rights.
The applicant appealed. On 17 December 1991 the Katowice Court of Appeal (Sąd Apelacyjny) dismissed his appeal.
The applicant served the twelve-year sentence during the following periods: from 2 May 1990 to 14 February 1993; from 17 February 1993 to 20 June 1993; from 18 September 1993 to 31 January 1995; from 12 April 1995 to 22 May 1999; and from 10 October 2001 to 6 March 2005.
On 22 September 1994 the applicant was convicted of burglary by the Dąbrowa Górnicza District Court (Sąd Rejonowy) and sentenced to two years and three months' imprisonment. That judgment was partly upheld on appeal by the  on 22 December 1994. The applicant served this sentence between 7 May 2005 and 7 August 2007.
On 25 September 2005 the applicant, who was at that time serving his sentence in the Katowice Detention Centre, unsuccessfully attempted to vote in the parliamentary elections. On the same date he wrote a “declaration” in which he complained to the Katowice Local Electoral Commission (Obwodowa Komisja Wyborcza) about not being allowed to vote. The following handwritten note, accompanied by a stamp of the Katowice Local Electoral Commission and an illegible signature, was made on the applicant's declaration:
“On 25 September 2005 Mr Leszek Hinczewski came to cast his vote. He did not vote, however, because he was still deprived of his civic rights and his name had been deleted from the list of voters. The Municipal Office was consulted and confirmed that it had been notified by the  [about the applicant's conviction in] case IVK 165/90. The date of notification: 22 August 2005.”
On 9 July 2006 the applicant sent the Court a letter from the Sosnowiec Detention Centre. The envelope in which the letter was delivered to the Registry bears the following stamp: “Będzin District Court Censored” (Sąd Rejonowy w Będzinie Cenzurowano) and an illegible signature. An identical stamp “Bedzin District Court Censored” with an illegible signature can be found on the second page of the applicant's letter addressed to the Registrar. The envelope bears signs of having been opened: its right side has been cut open and then resealed with sellotape.
The applicant submitted that his letter from the Ombudsman had been interfered with by the authorities. He provided the original envelope in which the letter was delivered to him. The envelope bears the stamp of the sender, the Office of the Ombudsman in , and is postmarked 27 July 2005. According to other stamps, it appears that the letter arrived at the Sosnowiec Detention Centre on 1 August 2005 (Areszt Śledczy w Sosnowcu), and was then sent to the Dabrowa Gornicza District Prosecutor (Prokuratura Rejonowa... ), who returned it to the Detention Centre on 11 August 2005. On the stamp of the Dabrowa Gornicza District Prosecutor there is a handwritten note: “Censored” (Ocenzurowano) and an illegible signature. The envelope bears signs of having been opened: the top has been cut open and then resealed with sellotape.
Article 62 of the Constitution of Poland provides as follows:
“1.  If, no later than on the day of vote, he has attained 18 years of age, a Polish citizen shall have the right to participate in a referendum and the right to vote for the President of the Republic of Poland as well as representatives to the Sejm and Senate and organs of local government.
Persons who, by a final judgment of a court, have been subjected to legal incapacitation or deprived of civic or electoral rights, shall have no right to participate in a referendum or to vote.”
Article 79 § 1 of the Constitution provides as follows:
“In accordance with principles specified by statute, everyone whose constitutional freedoms or rights have been infringed, shall have the right to appeal to the Constitutional Court for a judgment on the conformity with the Constitution of a statute or another normative act on the basis of which a court or an administrative authority has issued a final decision on his freedoms or rights or on his obligations specified in the Constitution.”
Under the Criminal Code of 1996 (Kodeks Karny) (“the old Code”) deprivation of civic rights was one of the penal measures that could be ordered by a court. This law is no longer in force as it was repealed and replaced by the so-called “New Criminal Code” of 6 June 1997 (“the 1997 Code”), which entered into force on 1 September 1998. However, the provisions relevant to the instant case were included in the 1997 Code with only minor modifications.
Article 39 of the old Code (presently Article 40 § 1 of the 1997 Code) reads as follows in so far as relevant:
“The deprivation of civic rights shall include the loss of the right to vote and to be elected to the Sejm ....”
Article 44 §1 of the old Code (presently Article 43 § 1 of the 1997 Code), in its relevant part, provides as follows:
“[The deprivation of civil rights and other interdictions...] shall be imposed in terms of years for a period ranging from 1 to 10 years.”
Article 45 of the old Code (presently Article 43 § 2 of the 1997 Code) provides:
“The deprivation of rights or an interdiction imposed by the court shall take effect from the time the sentence becomes final; the period for which they were imposed does not run during the serving of a penalty of deprivation of liberty, even if the latter has been imposed for another offence.”
According to Article 40 § 2 of the 1997 Code deprivation of civic rights can be ordered together with a sentence of deprivation of liberty for a period longer than three years for a crime committed with particularly reprehensive motives.
Section 15 of the Law of 12 April 2001 on Elections to the Sejm and the Senate of the Republic of Poland (Ordynacja wyborcza do Sejmu Rzeczypospolitej Polskiej i do Senatu Rzeczypospolitej Polskiej) (“the 2001 Elections Act”) provides in so far as relevant as follows:
“1.  Everyone has a right to lodge a complaint with the mayor of a district (or the president of a town) about irregularities in the register of voters, and in particular:
1) the omission of a voter from the register;
...
The complaint shall be lodged in writing or orally for the record.
A mayor of a district (or president of a town) shall examine the complaint within three days from when it was lodged and give a decision on the merits.
A reasoned decision shall be served on the complainant and, when applicable, on other persons whom the decision concerns.
The complainant has a right to appeal against the decision ... dismissing his complaint within three days from the delivery of the decision. The appeal shall be lodged with the relevant District Court ...”
Section 20 of the 2001 Elections Act provides:
“3.  The list of voters in prisons and detention centres ... shall be drawn up on the basis of the registers of persons housed there on the day of elections ...
Persons who are deprived of civic rights by the final decision of a court shall not be included in the list referred to in § 3.”
Rules relating to the means of monitoring the correspondence of persons involved in criminal proceedings are set out in the Code of Execution of Criminal Sentences (Kodeks karny wykonawczy) (“the 1997 Code of Execution of Criminal Sentences”) which entered into force on 1 September 1998. Article 102 (11) of the 1997 Code of Execution of Criminal Sentences provides that convicted persons are entitled to have private and confidential correspondence with the State authorities and with the Ombudsman, which shall not be interfered with.
The relevant part of Article 103 § 1 of the Code provides as follows:
“Convicts (...) have a right to lodge complaints with institutions established by international treaties ratified by the  concerning the protection of human rights. Correspondence in those cases (...) shall be sent to the addressee without delay and shall not be interfered with.”