The case was referred to the Court by the European Commission of Human Rights ("the Commission") on 11 May 1988, within the three-month period laid down by Article 32 § 1 and Article 47 (art. 32-1, art. 47) of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms ("the Convention"). It originated in an application (no. 10964/84) against the  lodged with the Commission under Article 25 (art. 25) by Mr Georg Brozicek, a German national, on 7 May 1984.
The Commission's request referred to Articles 44 and 48 (art. 44, art. 48) and to the declaration whereby  recognised the compulsory jurisdiction of the Court (Article 46) (art. 46). The object of the request was to obtain a decision as to whether the facts of the case disclosed a breach by the respondent State of certain of its obligations under Article 6 §§ 3 (a) and 1 (art. 6-3-a, art. 6-1).
In response to the enquiry made in accordance with Rule 33 § 3 (d) of the Rules of Court, the applicant stated that he wished to take part in the proceedings. He was given leave to present his own case (Rule 30 § 1, second sentence).
The Chamber to be constituted included ex officio Mr C. Russo, the elected judge of Italian nationality (Article 43 of the Convention) (art. 43), and Mr R. Ryssdal, the President of the Court (Rule 21 § 3 (b)). On 30 May 1988, in the presence of the Registrar, the President drew by lot the names of the other five members, namely Mr F. Matscher, Mr L.-E. Pettiti, Mr J. Gersing, Mr A. Spielmann and Mr J. De Meyer (Article 43 in fine of the Convention and Rule 21 § 4) (art. 43). Subsequently, Mr Thór Vilhjálmsson, substitute judge, replaced Mr Gersing, who had died (Rules 22 § 1 and 24 § 1).
Mr Ryssdal assumed the office of President of the Chamber (Rule 21 § 5) and, through the Registrar, consulted the Agent of the Italian Government ("the Government"), the Delegate of the Commission and the applicant on the need for a written procedure (Rule 37 § 1). In accordance with the orders made in consequence, the registry received the applicant's memorial on 29 September 1988 and the Government's memorial on 2 November 1988.
In a letter which reached the registry on 10 January 1989, the Deputy Secretary to the Commission informed the Registrar that the Delegate would submit his observations at the hearing.
At the Government's request, the Court decided, on 23 February 1989, to hear five witnesses on a specific point and to order an opinion by a handwriting expert (Rule 40 § 1, first sub-paragraph).
The applicant for his part requested that other persons be called and the President agreed to this pursuant to Rule 40 § 1, second sub-paragraph, on the understanding that the evidence adduced should remain within the terms of reference already laid down by the Chamber.
The Chamber appointed Judges Matscher and Pettiti who took evidence from the various witnesses at a hearing held on 28 April 1989, in the presence of the participants in the proceedings before the Court.
They authorised one of the witnesses, who had a legitimate reason for being unable to come to , to submit a written statement which would be assessed by the Court as to its admissibility and relevance. Written statements by two other persons, which the applicant had sent to the registry on 24 April, were dealt with in the same way.
On 5 May 1989 the President received the opinion of Mrs A.-M. Jacquin-Keller, a handwriting expert at the Colmar Court of Appeal and approved by the French Court of Cassation, on the task which had been assigned to her by the Chamber (see paragraph 5 above).
The Court had previously obtained from the Commission, for the purposes of the investigative measure in question, various documents from the national proceedings and specimens of the applicant's handwriting.
On the same day, having consulted, through the Registrar, those who would be appearing before the Court, the President directed that the oral proceedings should open on 22 May 1989 (Rule 38).
The hearing took place in public in the Human Rights Building, , on the appointed day. The Court had held a preparatory meeting immediately beforehand.
There appeared before the Court:
- for the Government
- for the Commission
On the day of the hearing the applicant informed the Court that he was unable to attend because of an illness. He agreed to the hearing's being conducted in his absence. On 20 May he had supplied the text of his address.
The Court heard addresses by Mr Ferrari Bravo for the Government and Mr Batliner for the Commission as well as their replies to its questions.
On various dates between 22 May and 9 October, the participants in the proceedings before the Court sent to the registry observations, communications and documents, on their own initiative or at the Court's request, as the case may be.
On 26 May, after having deliberated, the Chamber relinquished jurisdiction forthwith in favour of the plenary Court (Rule 50).
Having taken note of the Government's agreement and the concurring opinions of the Commission and the applicant, the Court decided, on 28 September 1989, to proceed to judgment without holding a further hearing (Rule 26).
Mr Georg Brozicek was born in  and now resides at Steinalben in the Federal Republic of Germany, of which country he is a national.
On 13 August 1975 the municipal police of Pietra Ligure () detained him on the public highway shortly after he had torn down some small ornamental flags erected in connection with a fête organised by a political party. The police, who had intervened at the request of one of the organisers, took him to the police station because he did not have any identity papers with him and, according to their version of events, because he had to be protected against the hostility of the participants. On this occasion he wounded one of the police officers.
On 14 August the carabinieri, who had also intervened on the previous day, submitted a report on the incident to the Savona Public Prosecutor's Office. On the same day Mr Brozicek sent a letter, in French, to the Police Chief (questore) of , which was subsequently transmitted to the Public Prosecutor, who ordered its translation into Italian on 31 January 1976.
The Public Prosecutor's Office opened an investigation and on 23 February 1976 sent to the applicant - by registered letter requiring acknowledgment of receipt and bearing the address of the applicant's then residence in Nuremberg - a "judicial notification" (comunicazione giudiziaria; see paragraphs 24-25 below). It informed him that proceedings had been instituted against him for the offences of resisting the police and assault and wounding (Articles 337 and 582 of the Criminal Code). In addition, it invited him to appoint a defence lawyer of his choice and informed him that if he failed to do so Mr T. S., avvocato, would be appointed by the authorities.
On 1 March 1976 Mr Brozicek returned the document to the Public Prosecutor's Office with the following note (translation from the German):
"I return the enclosed document to the sender as I find it difficult to understand. In lodging my detailed complaint of 14 August - on which no action has yet been taken even though the facts complained of could have far-reaching consequences - and in all correspondence to date with the Italian authorities, I have always expressly requested that either the mother tongue of the persons concerned or one of the international official languages of the United Nations be used, in order to avoid from the outset any risk of misunderstanding."
The Public Prosecutor's Office received this letter on 3 March 1976. It did not send any reply and did not have the letter translated.
On 17 November 1978 the Public Prosecutor's Office sent to the applicant by registered letter requiring acknowledgment of receipt a second "judicial notification". In addition to the information contained in the first notification, it asked the applicant to provide an address for service in  (Article 177 bis of the Code of Criminal Procedure).
On 5 December 1978 the German postal authorities returned the letter to the sender marked "unclaimed".
The acknowledgment of receipt bore the name "Brozicek", in a different space to that provided for the addressee's signature. The Government maintained that it was the applicant's signature but he has always denied this; he claimed that he had not received the communication because he had just moved house. The expert opinion ordered by the Court (see paragraphs 5 and 8 above) did not resolve this question.
By an order (decreto) of 13 December 1978 the Public Prosecutor stated that it had not been possible to notify the applicant and that "further enquiries at the place of birth and place of last residence" had not produced any result. He appointed a defence lawyer and directed that all the documents for notification to the accused during the investigation should thereafter be lodged at the secretariat of the Public Prosecutor's Office.
At the hearing before the  on 22 May 1989, the Government affirmed that the reference to further enquiries was probably an oversight. They maintained that the provision applied to the applicant was the second part of the second paragraph of Article 177 bis of the Code of Criminal Procedure (concerning an accused who has given no address for service, see paragraph 26 below), which does not require such enquiries.
The Public Prosecutor summonsed Mr Brozicek to appear for examination on 30 December 1978, but to no avail, and, on that day, he asked the President of the  to commit the applicant for trial.
The trial was set down for 3 November 1980 but when the time came the proceedings had to be adjourned because the date of the hearing had not been notified to the accused.
On 11 March 1981 the President of the Savona Court decided that any notification would be lodged with the court registry because the accused had not provided an address for service in Italy (Articles 170 and 177 bis of the Code of Criminal Procedure, see paragraph 26 below). He also appointed a lawyer to represent the accused.
After an adjournment for reasons extraneous to the proceedings, the trial took place on 1 July 1981.
On that date the applicant was convicted in absentia, sentenced to five months' imprisonment and ordered to pay the costs. The sentence was, however, suspended and no reference to the conviction was to be included in criminal-record certificates issued at the request of private individuals.
This decision too was notified to the applicant by being lodged at the court registry because, still pursuant to Article 177 bis of the Code of Criminal Procedure, the president of the court had again noted, on 2 July, that Mr Brozicek had not provided an address for service in Italy.
As there was no appeal, the judgment became final on 7 July 1981.
On 5 May 1984 the applicant received a letter from the Principal Public Prosecutor at the German Federal Court of Justice (Bundesgerichtshof). The letter informed him of his conviction by judgment of the  court of 1 July 1981, which had become final on 7 July 1981, and that the conviction had been entered in the German criminal records (Article 52 of the Criminal Records Act, Bundeszentralregistergesetz).
On 7 May Mr Brozicek lodged an application with the Commission, stating, inter alia, that "the possibilities for appealing [were] manifestly time-barred under Italian law ...". On the same day he also wrote to the German Ministry of Foreign Affairs and the Italian Ministry of Justice.
In his letter to the German Ministry he requested its assistance in securing, as soon as possible, the rectification or the annulment of the  judgment.
In his letter to the Italian Ministry he claimed that he had not received any information in his own language on the trial and had been unable to defend himself because neither the indictment nor the judgment had been notified to him. He asked what possibilities of appealing against the decision were open to him.
On 5 October the Italian Ministry replied that he could lodge an appeal against the judgment outside the normal time-limits (hereinafter referred to as a "late appeal"; see paragraph 26 below), if the notification to him had not been lawfully made, and seek a retrial.
The applicant did not avail himself of either of these possibilities.
The German Ministry of Foreign Affairs instructed the Consulate General of the Federal Republic of Germany at  to determine whether there was any possibility of appealing against the judgment of 1 July 1981. As the first result of its communications with the  court, the Consulate forwarded to the applicant, on 10 July 1989, a photocopy of the Italian text of the judgment, which was for the most part handwritten. Mr Brozicek acknowledged receipt of this text by a letter dated 18 July 1984.
A judicial notification is the document by which the judicial authorities inform the person suspected of having committed an offence that an investigation has been opened and invite him to appoint a defence lawyer of his choice and to provide an address for service. It must specify the legal provisions infringed and the date of the alleged offence.
The investigating judge, in the event of a "formal" investigation, or the public prosecutor, where the investigation is "summary", must send the notification at the very beginning of their investigation (Articles 304 and 390 of the Code of Criminal Procedure).
The notification must be sent by registered letter requiring acknowledgment of receipt. If the letter is not delivered because the addressee is untraceable (irreperibile), a bailiff must serve the notification in accordance with the normal procedure (Articles 168-175 of the Code of Criminal Procedure).
In its Foti and Others judgment of 10 December 1982 and its Colozza judgment of 12 February 1985 (Series A no. 56, p. 12, §§ 33-36, and Series A no. 89, p. 11, §§ 18-19, and pp. 12-13, §§ 21-23) the Court gave a brief description of the Italian legislation then in force as regards the notification to a person or an accused who is "untraceable", trial in absentia (contumacia) and "late appeal" (appello apparentemente tardivo).
In this regard Article 177 bis of the Code of Criminal Procedure provides as follows (translation from the Italian):
"Where there is precise information in the documents in the proceedings as to the place where the accused resides abroad, the Public Prosecutor or trial judge (pretore) shall send him by registered letter notification of the proceedings against him with an invitation to declare or otherwise give notice of an address for service in the place where the proceedings are conducted. This formality shall neither suspend nor delay the proceedings.
Where the accused's address abroad is unknown or where he has not declared or otherwise given notice of an address for service or if the information provided by him is insufficient or inadequate, the judge or the public prosecutor shall make the order (decreto) provided for in Article 170.
The above provisions shall not apply where the issue of an arrest warrant is mandatory."
The second sub-paragraph of Article 170 states that (translation from the Italian):
"The judge or the public prosecutor ... shall take a decision appointing a defence lawyer to act for the accused where he does not yet have one in the place where the proceedings are conducted and ordering that notification which has proved or proves impossible to carry out be effected by means of lodging the relevant documents at the registry of the judicial organ before which the proceedings are pending. The defence lawyer shall be informed without delay of any such notification."
The possibility of lodging a "late appeal" was at the time derived from judicial interpretation of Articles 500 and 199 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, according to which (translation from the Italian):
Article 500
"In the case of in absentia proceedings, an extract of the decision or judgment shall be notified to the accused who may lodge against it any appeal that would have been open to him in respect of a judgment delivered in adversarial proceedings, subject to the provisions of the third paragraph of Article 199."
Article 199
"...
For the decisions or judgments referred to in Article 500, the period within which the accused may appeal shall begin to run from the notification of the decision or judgment.
 ..."
On the basis of these provisions the courts had consistently held that if the notification of an extract of a decision or judgment delivered in absentia was not lawful because it had been wrongly assumed that the accused did not intend to participate in the proceedings, the person concerned could, within three days, contest such notification and challenge the finality of the decision in question. If he was successful in so doing, he was accorded a new time-limit within which to appeal against the said decision.
The new Code of Criminal Procedure, which came into force on 24 October 1989, now makes express provision for this possibility of "re-establishing the time-limit".
Mr Brozicek lodged his application with the Commission on 7 May 1984 (no. 10964/84). He alleged a breach of Article 6 § 3 (a) (art. 6-3-a) of the Convention inasmuch as he had not been informed in a language which he understood of the nature and the cause of the accusation against him. He also complained of a violation of Article 6 § 1 (art. 6-1) on the ground that, since he had been tried in absentia without having any opportunity to defend himself, he had not had a fair trial.
The Commission declared the application admissible on 11 March 1987. In its report of 22 March 1988 (Article 31) (art. 31), it expressed the opinion that there had been a violation of Article 6 § 3 (a) (art. 6-3-a) (by eleven votes to one, with two abstentions) and of Article 6 § 1 (art. 6-1) (by thirteen votes, with one abstention). The full text of its opinion and of the two separate opinions accompanying it is reproduced as an annex to this judgment.