The case originated in two applications (nos. 23493/12 and 32397/12) against the Russian Federation lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by two Russian nationals, Ms Yelena Yuryevna Bazanova and Mr Anton Yuryevich Mukhachev (“the applicants”), on 11 April 2012 and 16 May 2012 respectively.
Ms Bazanova was represented by Mr I. Ogorodnikov, a lawyer practising in the Moscow Region. Mr Mukhachev was represented by Mr A. Vasilyev, a lawyer practising in Moscow. The Russian Government (“the Government”) were represented by Mr M. Galperin, Representative of the Russian Federation to the European Court of Human Rights.
On 30 October 2017 the Government were given notice of the complaints concerning the lack of public hearing and the remainder of the applications was declared inadmissible pursuant to Rule 54 § 3 of the Rules of Court.
Ms Bazanova (“the first applicant”) was born on 4 December 1964 and lives in Serpukhov.
On 6 October 2009 the first applicant, deputy head of the municipal administration at the time, was arrested on the charges of abuse of power and bribery. Ts. and K. alleged that they had bribed the first applicant in order to facilitate the purchase of plots of land.
On 19 November 2010 the Moscow Regional Court opened the trial in the first applicant’s case.
On 23 March 2011 K. complained to the court that certain publications about the trial had an adverse effect on his private life. The information disclosed had been damaging to his reputation. His statements had been taken out of context and misconstrued. He also alleged that unknown persons had followed and threatened him in the courthouse.
On the same date Ts. lodged a similar complaint with the court. He alleged that the publications in the local newspaper about the trial and his role in it had been damaging to his reputation.
On 24 March 2011 the prosecutor asked the court to hold the trial in camera. He relied on the complaints lodged by K. and Ts. The court granted the prosecutor’s request and decided to hold the trial in camera in order to protect the interests of the witnesses.
On 11 August 2011 the Regional Court found the first applicant guilty on two counts of abuse of power and two counts of bribery and sentenced her to 7.5 years’ imprisonment and a monetary fine. The first applicant appealed.
On 12 October 2011, having heard the judge rapporteur, the prosecutor, the first applicant and her counsel, the Supreme Court of the Russian Federation upheld the first applicant’s conviction in part (one count of abuse of power and one count of bribery in respect of Ts.’s attempt to purchase a plot of land) and quashed it in part (one count of abuse of power and one count of bribery in respect of K.’s attempt to purchase a plot of land) remitting the matter for fresh consideration. The court also reduced the first applicant’s sentence and the amount of the fine.
On 8 October 2013 the Regional Court found the first applicant guilty as charged, as regards charges of abuse of power and bribery in respect of the bribe paid by K., and sentenced her cumulatively to 7 years and 3 months’ imprisonment and a monetary fine. The court held a public hearing. It appears that the first applicant did not appeal against the judgment of 8 October 2013.
Mr Mukhachev (“the second applicant”), was born on 29 December 1976 and lived, prior to his conviction, in Zheleznodorozhniy, Moscow Region.
On 4 August 2009 the second applicant was arrested on the charges of extremism and fraud. He remained in custody pending investigation and trial.
On 31 March 2011 the Savelovskiy District Court of Moscow fixed the trial for 14 April 2011. The court decided to hold the trial in camera in order to ensure security for the parties to the proceedings and their family members.
On 30 September 2011 the District Court found the second applicant guilty as charged and sentenced him to 9 years’ imprisonment. The second applicant appealed.
On 14 December 2011, having heard the judge rapporteur, the prosecutor, the second applicant and his counsel and the counsel for the civil party, the Moscow City Court upheld, in substance, the second applicant’s conviction on appeal.