The case originated in an application (no. 10401/12) against the French Republic lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by an Algerian national, Mr Mohammed Helhal (“the applicant”), on 23 November 2011.
The applicant was represented by Mr P. Spinosi, a lawyer practising in Paris. The French Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Ms E. Belliard, Director of Legal Affairs, Ministry of Foreign Affairs.
The applicant, who is disabled, complained that his continued detention and the care he was receiving in prison were incompatible with Article 3 of the Convention.
On 17 December 2012 notice of the application was given to the Government.
The applicant, who was born in 1972, is serving a thirty-year prison sentence imposed on 31 May 2007 by the Meurthe-et-Moselle Assize Court for murder, attempted murder and assault involving the use or threatened use of a weapon. He has been imprisoned since 17 May 2002 and will become eligible for release on 18 July 2027.
On 18 March 2006, while he was in prison in Nancy, the applicant fell several metres during an attempted escape and suffered a fractured spine. He spent several months at the Fresnes rehabilitation clinic before being transferred to Mulhouse Prison, where he encountered substantial difficulties (particularly on account of the staircases, which made it impossible for him to move about unaided), and Metz Prison, where his cell was not equipped for wheelchair use. He was subsequently transferred back to Fresnes from 5 November 2008 until 28 May 2009. From that date until 17 September 2014 he was held in Uzerche Prison, before being transferred to Poitiers-Vivonne Prison, where he is currently detained.
On 12 August 2010 the applicant applied to the Tulle judge responsible for the execution of sentences to have his sentence suspended on medical grounds, under Article 720-1-1 of the Code of Criminal Procedure (see paragraph 27 below). He explained that as a wheelchair user with paraplegia, he was not being detained in appropriate conditions since the premises were not designed for wheelchair use, and he was unable to receive the care he required. He noted that access to the toilet in his cell was undignified, that he could not reach all parts of the prison premises unaided, and that the provision of medical and paramedical care was inadequate, particularly as regards physiotherapy. He pointed out that he was unable to go to the showers autonomously and that the prison had assigned a prisoner to assist him for a payment of fifty euros per month. This prison orderly was responsible for cleaning the applicant’s cell and accompanying him to the showers and washroom.
In an order of 27 September 2010 the judge appointed two doctors as experts. They submitted their reports on 2 and 14 November 2010.
The report by Dr G., drawn up on 21 October 2010, concluded:
“... Mr Mohammed Helhal has incomplete paraplegia with total effective urinary incontinence requiring self-catheterisation and round-the-clock use of a nappy. He also has major haemorrhoidal irregularities, for which he has refused any treatment.
Mr Mohammed Helhal currently has active muscle relaxation in the two lower limbs, for which physiotherapy is required several times a week on a regular, long-term basis.
That being so, Mr Mohammed Helhal’s state of health is not incompatible with imprisonment, subject to the express condition of being detained in a facility catering for his disability, where he can undergo regular physiotherapy and have appropriate access to a gym.”
The report by Dr R. was drawn up on 28 October 2010 and read as follows:
“... On 17 November 2009 ... Dr Dubois stated: ... ‘his condition requires treatment by a physiotherapist in a specialist environment and daily pressure-sore relief’. ...
The most recent assessment at Bordeaux University Hospital, where the patient stayed from 5 to 12 March 2010, confirms that there has been a good sensorimotor recovery in the lower limbs and that mobility is possible with two walking sticks and a frame, whereas at present the patient mainly moves about in a wheelchair.
Appropriate physiotherapy focusing on both the joints and the muscles would clearly enable the prisoner to perform his own transfers with technical support, which would also have the benefit of easing the complications at the pressure points. At the same time, alongside the favourable progress in this post-traumatic condition, the patient has an anal disorder as a result of haemorrhoid surgery, and this essentially causes discomfort on a functional level.
Conclusion
...
-  The prisoner displays sensorimotor damage resulting from a thoracolumbar spine fracture;
-  The damage is stable with clear evidence of motor recovery in the lower limbs;
-  Daily physiotherapy would be justified to improve motor skills in the lower limbs and the quality of transfers, but this is not possible at Uzerche Prison as there is no on-site physiotherapist;
-  There is permanent sensory damage in the L5-S1 region requiring self-catheterisation, which is being adequately managed on a day-to-day basis by the prisoner;
-  All of these spinal conditions are currently stable and unlikely to worsen, but could improve with proper treatment;
-  The various disorders observed, in terms of both traumatic spinal cord injuries and anal damage, are not life-endangering for the prisoner;
-  The prisoner’s state of health is in my opinion not incompatible in the long term with continued detention;
-  The disorders currently observed are stable and will continue to develop on a chronic basis, justifying palliative care.”
In a judgment of 3 February 2011 the Limoges Post-Sentencing Court dismissed the application for suspension of the applicant’s sentence. It took into account the two concurring medical opinions in finding that the applicant’s state of health was compatible in the long term with his imprisonment. However, the court observed that “Uzerche Prison manifestly fails to satisfy the criteria for ensuring a suitable detention regime for the applicant, in terms of both the premises and the availability of paramedical care, despite the undisputed efforts by the prison’s management and staff to ease the prisoner’s living conditions as far as possible”. It then noted that there were custodial facilities that were equipped to cater for the applicant’s condition, such as Fresnes Prison or Roanne Prison, “which is designed and organised in a manner compatible with accommodating disabled prisoners, and where [he] will be able to have the regular physiotherapy sessions that he rightly demands, since a masseur/physiotherapist comes to the prison almost every day”. The court concluded as follows:
“It therefore appears from all of the above considerations, both from a medical perspective and in terms of the prospect of arranging suitable conditions of detention, that the prisoner does not satisfy the requirements for having his sentence suspended on medical grounds.”
The applicant appealed against the judgment of 3 February 2011. He reiterated that besides the structural inadequacy of Uzerche Prison, he had not been offered any special arrangements in terms of medical and paramedical care (physiotherapy and access to the gym). He also submitted that Roanne Prison was no more suitable than Uzerche Prison as it did not have a rehabilitation facility.
In a judgment of 3 May 2011 the Post-Sentencing Division of the Limoges Court of Appeal upheld the judgment of 3 February, holding:
“The two experts concurred in concluding that [the applicant’s] condition was not incompatible in the long term with detention provided that he was given physiotherapy and access to a gym. While it is indeed not possible for these requirements to be fulfilled at Uzerche Prison, where [the applicant] has been transferred at his own request to be closer to his family, it has not been shown that he cannot be accommodated in conditions catering for his disorders at Roanne Prison, and therefore the criteria for suspending the execution of his sentence have not been satisfied, particularly since [the applicant] continues to deny – as stated in his letter of 23 March 2011 – the serious criminal acts that led to his conviction.”
The applicant appealed on points of law. In a judgment of 31 August 2011 the Court of Cassation declared the appeal inadmissible.
In a letter of 28 February 2012 to the Registry of the Court, the applicant contended that he was not undergoing any physical rehabilitation, there being no physiotherapist at Uzerche Prison, and that he had no access to the gym. He wrote that his health was deteriorating on a daily basis and that he was being mistreated through the lack of provision of care.
According to the Government, the applicant has received the following medical assistance:
(a)  twelve occasions of escorted leave between 3 May 2011 and 26 June 2012 for specialist consultations and medical imaging tests at Tulle Hospital and Limoges University Hospital;
(b)  thirty-three medical appointments with a doctor from the prison medical unit, consisting of a medical examination on 28 May 2009 followed by consultations spread across his time at the prison (ten in 2009, three in 2010, ten in 2011, six in 2012, one in 2013);
(c)  three stays in hospital for several days in 2010, 2011 and 2012;
(d)  technical assistance from nurses on fifty-five occasions between 2009 and 2013, plus weekly meetings with the prison nurse;
(e)  eight psychiatric consultations and sixteen meetings with a psychiatric nurse;
(f)  provision of medical equipment to alleviate or offset disabilities, including a walking frame (June 2009), an anti-pressure-sore cushion (August 2009), spectacles (January 2010), a new wheelchair (September 2012), and an electrostimulation device (February 2013).
In addition to the treatment described above, the Government informed the Court that from September 2012 the applicant had attended physiotherapy sessions at Uzerche Prison. The physiotherapist’s services had been engaged following three letters dated 18 November 2011, 28 December 2011 and 19 March 2012 in which the interregional director of the Prison Service had alerted the Director General of the Limousin Regional Health Agency to the detrimental effects of the lack of physiotherapy on the care provided to prisoners.
The Government added that the applicant had been offered the opportunity to attend yoga classes but had been removed from the list of those enrolled for the classes because of his non-attendance.
The applicant confirmed the occasions of escorted leave mentioned by the Government but pointed out that on each occasion he had been transferred by ambulance – with his wrists and ankles handcuffed – and had had to undergo a full body search beforehand and a rub-down search afterwards. He added that the full body searches carried out whenever he received visits and when he was escorted outside the prison were deeply humiliating; he was obliged to have his nappy inspected, and in order to proceed more quickly, several warders carried out this task together. During one inspection, a senior warder had said in front of everyone that “the boss had given instructions to inspect his nappy”. The applicant maintained that as a result of these practices, he had asked his sister to visit him less frequently.
With regard to the applicant’s complaints about the instances of escorted leave and the body searches, the Government pointed out that the physical damage he had suffered could not be regarded as having eradicated any security risk, since his health had no bearing on his potential connections on the outside and the risk of his escaping. To that end, they produced copies of two decisions dated 2011 (month illegible) and June 2012 ordering individual (full body) searches in connection with escorted leave for medical reasons. They noted that in May 2013 the applicant had been sent to a punishment cell for ten days following an assault on a fellow prisoner and the discovery of a mobile telephone in his cell. They stated that searches in the prison were not carried out systematically but on the basis of incidents noted during visits or in the cells. They produced three decisions ordering individual searches, dated 14 May and 26 December 2011 and 10 May 2013 (involving searches of the applicant’s cell), and seven decisions ordering a one-off search of a specific sector of the prison after the visits received on 10 June 2011, 10 November 2011, 26 June 2012, 1 October 2012, 14 December 2012, 22 March 2013 and 31 May 2013.
With regard to physiotherapy, the applicant pointed out that he had only started receiving it in September 2012 and that it was limited to a weekly fifteen-minute session. He produced a medical certificate issued on 10 May 2013 by a doctor from the Outpatient Consultation and Treatment Unit (unité de consultation et de soins ambulatoires – “the UCSA”) stating that his “condition requires daily rehabilitation, which Uzerche Prison is unable to provide, both on account of the lack of qualified staff and because the premises are not suitably equipped. As a result, the patient cannot remain in this facility without his health suffering. He must be given the possibility of admission to a specialised facility.” The applicant submitted that the doctor was repeating what his colleagues had already noted on 17 November 2009 (see paragraph 10 above) and 11 March 2011; he produced a medical certificate signed on the latter date by a doctor from the UCSA who stated that the applicant could not remain in the facility without his health suffering and added that “his paraplegia must be treated in a rehabilitation centre”.
With regard to the electrostimulation device, the applicant submitted that his doctor had obtained the funds needed to purchase it but that the prison authorities had not allowed him to do so. As to the possibility of attending yoga classes, the applicant pointed out that he had been urged to go no more than once a week in order to avoid “monopolising” the lift leading to where the classes were held.
The applicant again stressed that he was dependent on the prison orderly responsible for assisting him in his everyday activities. The prisoner currently “assigned” to that duty was the third since his admission to the prison, and the applicant was dependent on him for supplying incontinence products, accompanying him to the showers (there was a step preventing unassisted wheelchair access) and cleaning his cell. This level of dependency and the problems associated with his incontinence complicated his relationship with the orderly. Going to the shower was a stressful time because the structure did not shield him from the view of others and his incontinence exposed him to extremely humiliating situations, causing irritation or even hostility on the part of his fellow inmates, who were unwilling to put up with such inconvenience in the course of their personal hygiene activities.
Lastly, the applicant informed the Court that he had been temporarily transferred to a cell in the secure unit, further to a decision by the classification board, after a mobile phone had been found in his cell. Under the resulting regime, he had access to one hour’s exercise in the morning and one hour in the afternoon, despite the fact that a doctor had issued a certificate on 7 June 2013 stating that his condition required access to at least five hours’ exercise a day. The Government stated that the applicant had been transferred back to his cell on 26 June 2013.
The applicant submitted that although the prison management had indeed encouraged him to request a transfer to Roanne Prison, their approach had been guided by purely administrative considerations unconnected to his care-related needs. The management had refused to give the slightest undertaking about the conditions in which he would be accommodated in Roanne and the care he could be given there. They had been unable to provide any guarantees as to care arrangements as there were six cells for disabled prisoners at that facility and they were all occupied, and a single physiotherapist came to the prison for four half-days a week to provide services for five hundred prisoners. The applicant contended that he had not applied for a transfer on the grounds that the prison in question did not offer appropriate care facilities and would simply have represented a further upheaval and ordeal for him following his repeated moves from one prison to another (twelve transfers between 2002 and 2009). He referred to information obtained from International Prison Watch (Observatoire international des prisons – OIP) by his sister and his lawyer and produced a copy of an email sent by OIP to his lawyer on 3 January 2011, reading as follows:
“I do not think that Meaux and Roanne are particularly well equipped although, like all recent establishments, they do have disabled cells. I attach a decision in which the Douai Court of Appeal found, in relation to another wheelchair user, that ‘no custodial facility is equipped to cater for the applicant’s condition’ and accordingly suspended the execution of his sentence. ... Nevertheless, I consider it important to stress the consequences of a change of prison, not only in terms of family ties but also as regards the procedure for requesting a suspension of the sentence, since that procedure would then have to be started over again. ...”
The applicant emphasised in any event that the medical unit at Uzerche Prison had not recommended his transfer to Roanne but rather the provision of treatment in a specialist facility.
The Government submitted that the applicant’s transfer to Roanne Prison had been envisaged by the health-care professionals at Uzerche Prison but observed that he had never actually requested such a transfer; after mentioning a transfer request, he had indicated the following day (9 August 2011) that he did not intend to pursue it, for reasons that were unclear. The Government also produced a note drawn up on 12 June 2012, which in their submission suggested that “the applicant’s main motivation related to the previous decisions of the judicial authorities on requests for suspension of sentences, rather than to the treatment he might receive”. They rejected the applicant’s arguments about the inability of Roanne Prison to accommodate him and submitted, in their additional observations, that only three of the six cells reserved for people with reduced mobility were occupied. They produced a copy of an email sent by the Prison Service in July 2013 indicating the availability of such cells. They also pointed out that an agreement had been signed in June 2013 between Roanne Prison, the UCSA and a non-governmental organisation with a view to providing appropriate care for dependent prisoners with specialist professional assistance.
Article 720-1-1 of the Code of Criminal Procedure was worded as follows at the material time:
“Unless there is a serious risk of reoffending, suspension may also be ordered, regardless of the nature of the sentence or the portion remaining to be served, and for a duration that does not need to be determined, where it has been established that the prisoner has a life-threatening illness or that his or her state of health is incompatible in the long term with continued detention, save in cases where persons detained in a psychiatric institution are admitted to hospital.
The suspension may only be ordered if two separate medical opinions concur in finding that the prisoner is in one of the situations set out in the previous paragraph. However, in an emergency where the prisoner’s life is at risk, the suspension may be ordered on the basis of a medical certificate issued by the doctor in charge of the medical unit treating the prisoner, or a doctor standing in for him or her ...”
Law no. 2014-896 of 15 August 2014 on adapting sentences to the individual and increasing the effectiveness of criminal penalties, which came into force on 1 October 2014, has amended the system for suspending the execution of sentences. In the case of convicted prisoners, it has, among other things, abolished the requirement for a second medical opinion. Paragraph 2 of Article 720-1-1 of the Code of Criminal Procedure now provides that “[t]he suspension may only be ordered if a medical opinion establishes that the prisoner is in one of the situations set out in the previous paragraph”. In the same paragraph, “where the prisoner’s life is at risk” has been removed as a requirement in the event of an emergency.
Examining the provision in question, the Court of Cassation specified in a judgment of 28 September 2005 (Criminal Division, 05-81.010) that the convicted prisoner’s condition necessarily required a poor short-term prognosis. In a judgment of 7 January 2009 (Criminal Division, 08-83364) the Court of Cassation held that in rejecting an application by a disabled prisoner for the suspension of his sentence, the Post-Sentencing Division of the Amiens Court of Appeal had not justified its decision on the basis of Article 720-1-1 of the Code of Criminal Procedure since it had not determined, as the applicant’s submissions had invited it to do, whether the two expert opinions indicated that the actual conditions of his detention were incompatible in the long term with his state of health. Lastly, in a decision of 26 June 2013 (Criminal Division, 12-88284) the Court of Cassation refused to refer a question relating to Article 720-1-1 of the Code of Criminal Procedure to the Constitutional Council for a preliminary ruling on constitutionality. The question concerned the alleged interference with the ordinary courts’ duty to protect personal liberty in so far as they were bound by the medical experts’ two concurring opinions; the fact that the measure could be granted only if there was no serious risk of reoffending; and the lack of clarity of the provision in terms of respect for human dignity. The Criminal Division found that the question raised had no serious merit, for the following reasons:
“... firstly, ... the person concerned has been deprived of his liberty for the purpose of serving a sentence deemed necessary by the judicial authority, a suspension of the sentence on medical grounds being an exceptional measure, and secondly, ... even where two expert opinions concur in finding that the prisoner is not in one of the situations provided for in Article 720-1-1 [of the Code of Criminal Procedure], it is reasonable to envisage that the court dealing with an application for suspension of a sentence would be competent either to order a further opinion or to determine whether the continued detention of the person concerned would amount to inhuman or degrading treatment, for example because it would be incompatible with the guarantees to which he is entitled for the protection of his health.”
In his annual activity report for 2012 the Inspector General of Detention Facilities (contrôleur général des lieux de privation de liberté – CGLPL) included a chapter on “old age, invalidity and disability in prison”, in which he noted that people in these categories were excluded by the very nature of prison architecture and the organisation of everyday prison life. He explained that cells for prisoners with reduced mobility were often located on the ground floor, which was normally set aside for prisoners under the “closed doors” regime; this was not conducive to any communication. The daily routine was a further source of anxiety: “fear of being confronted with violence, fear of a primarily young population, fear of going to the exercise yard. Boredom too, since an occupational activity is no longer accessible to them and the activities available are unsuited to their physical condition. And finally, the humiliation of being dependent. Although many facilities have signed agreements with associations providing personal assistance, there are still too many prisons where the duties of ‘attendant’ or domestic help are performed by other prisoners employed by the prison management – the ‘prison orderlies’; this situation is unacceptable on account of the risks of blackmail and the lack of appropriate training and remuneration.”
The CGLPL advocated a rethink of the architecture and living arrangements at detention facilities, but emphasised that consideration should be given to allowing these types of prisoners to serve their sentences in a non-custodial environment. He also recommended that “the suspension of sentences on medical grounds be better adapted to the reality of the situations it may cover”. Among the targets of his criticism in that respect were the restrictive conditions laid down in Article 720-1-1 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, by which the execution of a sentence could be suspended only in extremely serious cases and as a short-term measure. He added: “It must be noted that the experts assigned to assess whether the prisoner’s health is compatible with continued detention do not take sufficient account of the physical conditions of incarceration, quite simply because they are entirely unaware of the constraints it entails”. He recommended that Parliament amend Article 720-1-1 “to introduce a third possible criterion besides the risk to life and the long-term incompatibility of the prisoner’s health with detention, namely granting a request for suspension of a sentence where the treatment required by the prisoner cannot be provided either in detention or even during periods of ordinary or escorted prison leave, because of its repetitive and regular nature”.
On 20 November 2013 the Justice/Health Interministerial Working Group submitted a report to the Ministers of Justice and Health on “Adjustments of sentence and suspensions of sentence on medical grounds”, which recommended, among other things, extending the scope of the suspension of sentences on medical grounds by giving greater consideration to disabilities in the examination of such applications: “The working group agrees on the need to specify in the practical guide that the suspension of a sentence on medical grounds is applicable to individuals whose disability is incompatible in the long term with detention and that due regard should be had in this assessment to the actual conditions of ordinary detention (reference is made to the case-law of the European Court of Human Rights and the Court of Cassation). It is recommended that the experts be provided with all possible means in order to determine whether the prisoner’s health is compatible with the conditions of ordinary detention. While some members of the group wanted to include a specific reference to disability in the text of Article 720-1-1 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, others are of the view that disability can already be taken into account under the existing provisions.”
Reference is made to the judgments in Mouisel v. France (no. 67263/01, § 26, ECHR 2002-IX) and Rivière v. France (no. 33834/03, § 29, 11 July 2006) for the provisions governing health care in prison. It should be noted that health care for prisoners has been the responsibility of the public hospital service since the Law of 18 January 1994 came into force. Outside appointments and emergency and short-term hospital admissions take place at the hospital to which the UCSA – an internal unit of the hospital based in the detention facility – is attached. Any treatment that is unavailable at the UCSA is provided either at the local hospital or in one of the eight secure interregional hospital units (unités hospitalières sécurisées interrégionales – UHSI) or the National Public Health Institution in Fresnes (EPSNF). The UHSIs are responsible for providing medical and surgical treatment for detainees referred by UCSA medical personnel for stays of more than forty-eight hours. The EPSNF has medical, aftercare and rehabilitation departments and admits prisoners whose health requires an extended hospital stay or major therapy (see Guide du prisonnier (Prisoner’s handbook), OIP, 2012, section on “La médecine générale”). In its 2014 annual report the Court of Audit included a chapter entitled “Detainees’ health: further progress still essential”, in which it outlined the arrangements for admitting detainees to hospital and noted, among other things, the “poor take-up of somatic hospital capacity”, and especially the under-occupation of the UHSIs. The report also mentions “an approach to health care that is all too often dependent on the operation of the prison system”, and concludes that “in addition to the rigidity and constraints of the prison environment, the available treatment is still inadequate, the need for more modern premises and equipment is not satisfied and the forms of cooperation between the parties concerned are fragile and incomplete”. Furthermore, it calls for “the development of a stronger and clearer publichealth policy” through the assistance of regional health agencies, which “assess and identify detainees’ health-care needs. They define and regulate the provision of health care in a prison environment.”
Article D. 82 of the Code of Criminal Procedure provides that prisoners can be transferred either at the request of the governor of the prison where they are serving their sentence or at their own request. A Prison Service circular of 21 February 2012 on the assignment of detainees to custodial facilities specifies the procedure for applying for a transfer. Article D. 360 of the same Code deals with transfers of prisoners to a facility better equipped to cater for their condition. Article R. 57-8-6 of the Code concerns the rights of prisoners with disabilities. The two last-mentioned provisions are worded as follows:
“A transfer to a more appropriate custodial facility may be requested, in accordance with the fourth paragraph of Article D. 382, for detainees whose physical conditions of detention in the facility where they are being held are not suited to their medical condition, and for prisoners requiring special medical care.
The regional director shall order any transfer within his or her region, subject to the conditions laid down in Article D. 301, with the aim of enabling a sick prisoner to receive treatment in more favourable conditions.
In the case of remand prisoners, the judge dealing with the investigation must have given his or her prior consent to the transfer, after being informed of the likely duration of the treatment envisaged.”
“Any detainees who are prevented on a long-term basis, as a result of functional limitations of the upper limbs in connection with a physical disability, from independently performing actions linked to treatment prescribed by a doctor may designate another person, including a fellow detainee, to help him or her carry out these actions during periods when professional care staff are absent. The person thus designated must give express consent. ...
The head of the facility may oppose the designation of a particular helper for reasons relating, for example, to personal safety or the preservation of order within the facility.” [See also the methodological guide to health care for persons detained by the judicial authorities, Ministry of Justice and Ministry of Social Affairs and Health, 2012, p. 90]
The CGLPL published a detailed report following his visit to Uzerche Prison, an institution opened in 1990; only some parts of the report are relevant to the present case. It does not specifically mention problems linked to the situation for people with disabilities. With regard to the more general question of personal hygiene, the CGLPL observed that “no particular difficulties for prisoners have been noted. The showers are permanently accessible for prisoners under the ‘open doors’ regime, and once a day for prisoners under the ‘closed doors’ regime in B building.” He noted that the exercise yards were similar in all the wings of the prison, comprising a yard, two or three concrete benches, a concrete table-tennis table and an area for playing boules. They had “Turkish” (squat) toilets, which were inaccessible for prisoners with certain types of disability. In buildings C and D, there had for a long time been unrestricted access to the exercise yard, and prisoners had been able to come and go as they pleased. This was no longer the case. Set opening times had been introduced, and prisoners were required to enter the yard at the start of the time slot and leave at the end, with no other option: from 9 to 11 a.m., 2 to 4 p.m. and 4 to 5.30 p.m. The report also noted that “no physiotherapists have visited the prison since the retirement in 2009 of the person who previously performed this service. Several prisoners have complained about this.”