The case originated in an application (no. 44896/11) against the Republic of Moldova lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Moldovan national, Mr Mihail Ciobanu (“the applicant”), on 11 July 2011.
The applicant was represented by Mr C. Tănase, a lawyer practising in Chișinău. The Moldovan Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Mr O. Rotari.
The applicant alleged, in particular, that the criminal proceedings against him had not been fair under Article 6 § 1 of the Convention.
On 11 June 2018 the Government were given notice of the application.
The Government submitted a unilateral declaration and invited the Court to strike out the application, in accordance with Article 37 of the Convention.
The applicant was born in 1987 and lives in Pfungen, Switzerland.
In January 2009 the applicant was involved in a car accident in Chișinău as a result of which one person died and another was injured. As a consequence he was accused of reckless driving resulting with the death and injury of persons.
On 15 April 2010 the Buiucani District Court acquitted the applicant, inter alia, on the basis of witness testimonies. The court came to the conclusion that it had been the two victims and not the applicant who had been responsible for the accident. The prosecutor in charge of the case and one of the victims’ families appealed against the judgment.
On 8 September 2010 the Chișinău Court of Appeal upheld the appeals and reversed the judgment of the first instance court. In so doing, the Court of Appeal did not hear anew the witnesses but only read out their statements as recorded by the first instance court. The applicant was convicted and given a suspended sentence of five years’ imprisonment. He lodged an appeal on points of law and argued, inter alia, that in convicting him, the Court of Appeal had failed to examine the evidence relied upon by the first instance court to acquit him.
On 9 February 2011 the Supreme Court of Justice rejected the applicant’s appeal and confirmed the judgment of the Court of Appeal.
Article 419 of the Code of Criminal Procedure provides that the procedure for rehearing a case on appeal must follow the general rules for the examination of a criminal case at first instance.
An explanatory judgment of the Plenary Supreme Court of Justice, No. 22 of 12 December 2005, reads, in so far as relevant, as follows:
“Bearing in mind the provisions of Article 6 of the European Convention on Human Rights, the appellate court, after an acquittal by a first-instance court, cannot order a conviction for the first time without hearing the accused or assessing the evidence directly.”