The case originated in an application (no. 4157/04) against the  lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Russian national, Mr Yevgeniy Pletmentsev (“the applicant”), on 2 December 2003.
The applicant was represented by Messrs A. Kiryanov and K. Lugantsev, lawyers practising in . The Russian Government (“the Government”) were represented by Mr G. Matyushkin, Representative of the  at the European Court of Human Rights.
The applicant complained, in particular, that his detention had been unlawful and based on insufficient reasons.
On 29 January 2009 the President of the First Section decided to give notice of the complaints to the Government. It was also decided to rule on the admissibility and merits of the application at the same time (former Article 29 § 1).
The applicant was born in 1962 and lived, before his arrest, in the town of  in the Rostov Region.
In June 1998 the  town police (“the Town Police”) instituted criminal proceedings against the applicant on suspicion of fraud, fraudulent obtaining of loans, misuse of official position and forgery.
By a judgment of 22 March 2000 the Taganrog Town Court (“the Town Court”), composed of Judge U. and lay judges Kh. and R., established that in 1997 the applicant, as the manager of a municipal enterprise, had violated various licensing regulations and submitted false information when applying for a loan. The court convicted the applicant of fraud and acquiring a loan on the basis of false information and sentenced him to five years and six months’ conditional imprisonment, with three years’ probation. The judgment was not appealed against and became final. The applicant remained at liberty.
On 4 December 2001 the Town Police instituted criminal proceedings against the applicant on suspicion of a further episode of aggravated fraud against D., committed by the applicant in concert with B. The applicant and B. both remained at large under an undertaking not to leave their town of residence.
On an unspecified date the case was sent for trial by the .
On 15 April 2002 the , composed of judge Dz. and lay judges V. and Sh., remanded the applicant and his co-accused in custody. The remand order, in so far as relevant, read as follows:
“... The accused B. and [the applicant] have been charged with deceitfully acquiring from D. 20,000 United States dollars ... They denied the charges in court.
Moreover, [the applicant] insulted the victim, calling him a “stinker”; [the applicant’s] conduct was threatening. The prosecutor has applied for his remand in custody. The [c]ourt considers the application well-founded.
Detention should be chosen as a preventive measure in respect of [the applicant], as well as B., because, if at large, they could influence the course of the proceedings and the witnesses, including [illegible] the victim.”
The applicant did not appeal against the order.
By a judgment of 16 April 2002 the , with Judge Dz. presiding, assisted by lay judges V. and Sh., found the applicant guilty of fraud committed in concert with B. against D. in August-September 2001. Taking into account the applicant’s previous conviction and the fact that he had committed the crime while on probation, the court imposed on him an aggregate sentence of six years’ imprisonment.
On 4 June 2002 the  (“the ”) upheld the conviction on appeal.
On 4 September 2003 the Presidium of the  (“the ”) set aside the judgment of 22 March 2000 by way of supervisory review on the ground that lay judges Kh. and R. had unlawfully participated in the examination of the applicant’s case. The case was remitted to the first-instance court for a fresh examination.
On 17 September 2003 the applicant lodged with the Presidium Court an application for supervisory review of the judgment of 16 April 2002, as upheld on appeal, as well as of the detention order of 15 April 2002.
On 20 November 2003 the Presidium Court set aside the judgment of 16 April 2002, as upheld on appeal, and remitted the case to the firstinstance court for a fresh examination. The issue was examined in the presence of the prosecutor; the applicant and his lawyers were absent. The court held, in particular, that the composition of the court which had delivered the judgment of 16 April 2002 had been unlawful because lay judge V. had been assigned to work not with the presiding judge Dz. but with another judge of the . Moreover, V.’s term of service had exceeded the statutory fixed limit. Hence, her participation in the examination of the applicant’s case had been unlawful. That breach of the rules of criminal procedure was an unconditional ground for quashing the conviction and sending the case for a fresh examination. Lastly, the court noted that it found no reason to vary the preventive measure in the form of detention “chosen in respect of [the applicant] by the court” and held that it was to remain unchanged, without providing any further details in that regard. The court did not set a time-limit for the applicant’s detention. The decision was silent on the applicant’s arguments concerning the detention order of 15 April 2002.
On 15 January 2004 the criminal cases against the applicant were joined.
On 31 March 2004 the  convicted the applicant of two counts of fraud and sentenced him to five years’ imprisonment. The court deducted the time the applicant had spent in detention from 15 April 2002 to 31 March 2004 from the sentence.
On 25 May 2004 the  upheld that judgment on appeal.
On 23 December 2003, at the applicant’s request, the  held a preliminary hearing in his criminal case concerning the second fraud episode. By a decision of the same date it granted the applicant’s request and remitted the case to the prosecutor with a view to joining the two criminal cases against him. It also dismissed a request by the applicant for release, stating that the  had ordered that the preventive measure in respect of him and his co-accused was to remain unchanged. In accordance with Article 255 of the Code of Criminal Procedure (“the CCrP”), the applicant’s detention pending trial could be extended up to six months and accordingly the , which had received the case file on 2 December 2003, was acting in compliance with that provision. It further held that there were no grounds for choosing a more lenient preventive measure because both accused were charged with a serious crime and if they remained at large might interfere with the proceedings. The decision did not set a time-limit for the applicant’s detention.
The applicant appealed, claiming, among other things, that the timelimits for his detention had expired and that the authorities were not acting with the requisite diligence in conducting the criminal proceedings against him.
On 15 January 2004 the prosecutor joined the two criminal cases against the applicant. The new case was assigned the number 9883479 and on an unspecified date the prosecutor sent it to the .
On 10 February 2004 the  rejected the applicant’s appeal against the decision of 23 December 2003. It noted, among other things, that, contrary to the applicant’s allegation, there had been no breach of Articles 109 and 255 of the CCrP because on 2 December 2003 the Town Court had received his case after the quashing of the conviction by way of supervisory review and because it had neither chosen the preventive measure in respect of the applicant nor extended his detention under those provisions.
By a decision of 26 February 2004 the  listed a hearing in the applicant’s case. By the same decision it terminated the applicant’s prosecution in respect of all charges other than the two counts of fraud because they had become time-barred. The court further dismissed the applicant’s request for release with reference to Article 255 of the CCrP. It noted that it saw no reason to vary the preventive measure in respect of either accused, or to choose a more lenient preventive measure, given the gravity of the charges against them and the possibility that, if at large, they might pervert the course of justice. The decision did not set any time-limits for the applicant’s detention.
On 13 April 2004 the  upheld that decision on appeal. It stated that the applicant and his co-accused were charged with a serious crime and there were grounds to believe that they might abscond or “interfere with the establishment of the truth”. It also noted that the detention of the applicant and his co-accused had been authorised by a court and that their conviction had been quashed by way of supervisory review. Their criminal case had then been remitted for a fresh trial to the , with an order that the preventive measure was to remain unchanged.
Since 1 July 2002, criminal-law matters have been governed by the Russian Code of Criminal Procedure (Law no. 174-FZ of 18 December 2001, “the CCrP”).
“Preventive measures” include an undertaking not to leave a town or region, personal surety, bail and detention (Article 98). When deciding on a preventive measure, the competent authority is required to consider whether there are “sufficient grounds to believe” that the accused would abscond during the investigation or trial, reoffend or obstruct the establishment of the truth (Article 97). It must also take into account the gravity of the charge, information on the accused’s character, his or her profession, age, state of health, family status and other circumstances (Article 99). In exceptional circumstances, and where there exist grounds listed in Article 97, a preventive measure may be applied to a suspect, taking into account the circumstances listed in Article 99 (Article 100). If necessary, the suspect or accused may be asked to give an undertaking to appear (Article 112).
Time-limits for detention
The CCrP makes a distinction between two types of remand in custody: the first being “pending investigation”, that is, while a competent agency – the police or a prosecutor’s office – is investigating the case, and the second being “before the court” (or “pending trial”), at the judicial stage.
A custodial measure may only be ordered by a judicial decision and in respect of a person who is suspected of, or charged with, a criminal offence punishable by more than two years’ imprisonment (Article 108). The time-limit for detention pending investigation is fixed at two months (Article 109). A judge may extend that period up to six months (Article 109 § 2). Further extensions may only be granted by a judge and if the person is charged with serious or particularly serious criminal offences (Article 109 § 3). No extension beyond eighteen months is permissible and the detainee must be released immediately (Article 109 § 4).
The trial court can hold a preliminary hearing to examine such requests by the defence as, for instance, a request to exclude certain pieces of evidence or to summon defence witnesses (Articles 234 and 235). Following the preliminary hearing the trial court can decide, among other things, to return the case file to the prosecutor, to suspend the examination of the case, or to terminate criminal proceedings against the defendant (Articles 236-239). If the trial court decides to return the case to the prosecutor, it must decide on the preventive measure in respect of the accused (Article 237 § 3).
In its Ruling no. 4-P of 22 March 2005 the Constitutional Court confirmed that detention of a criminal suspect or accused was to be authorised by a court decision issued in accordance with the requirements of the law of criminal procedure. When quashing a conviction by way of supervisory review and remitting the case for a retrial, the supervisoryreview court was under an obligation to examine the issue of detention. In so doing, it was to be guided by the requirements set out in Articles 10, 108, 109 and 255 of the CCrP and to proceed on the assumption that the preventive measure chosen during the previous round of proceedings had ceased to apply after the judgment convicting the defendant had become final. The quashing of the conviction did not automatically restore the preventive measure and if the court considered that the accused was to remain in custody it was to ascertain, with the proper participation of the interested parties, whether there were grounds, including factual circumstances, calling for his or her detention in the new round of proceedings. Such detention order could be issued after the parties had been provided with an opportunity to state their position before the court, so as to enable it to carry out its own assessment of the circumstances of the case, rather than base its decision solely on arguments raised by the prosecution or mentioned in a previous detention order. Moreover, the supervisoryreview court was to take into account the stage of the criminal proceedings, which could entail the emergence of new circumstances calling for the preventive measure to be varied. At the same time, irrespective of the procedural stage, a decision to place a person in custody or to extend his or her detention needed to reflect the factual circumstances examined by the court. Such court’s assessment could be made in a separate decision or be part of a decision to set aside the conviction and remit the case for fresh examination.