The case originated in an application (no. 14431/06) against the Russian Federation lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Russian national, Mr Aleksandr Valeryevich Aleksandrov (“the applicant”), on 10 February 2006.
The applicant was represented by Mr M. Moshkin, a lawyer practising in Podolsk, Moscow Region. The Russian Government (“the Government”) were represented initially by Mr G. Matyushkin, the Representative of the Russian Federation to the European Court of Human Rights, and then by his successor in that office, Mr M. Galperin.
On 6 July 2015 the complaint concerning the allegedly discriminatory nature of the applicant’s sentence was communicated to the Government and the remainder of the application was declared inadmissible, pursuant to Rule 54 § 3 of the Rules of Court. The parties submitted written observations on the admissibility and merits.
The applicant was born in 1983 and lives in Cheboksary.
On 19 July 2005 the Chertanovskiy District Court in Moscow found the applicant guilty of kicking a police officer while intoxicated, an offence under Article 318(1) of the Criminal Code, and sentenced him to one year’s imprisonment. The District Court explained the decision to impose a custodial sentence in the following manner:
“When sentencing the defendant, Mr Aleksandrov, the court takes into account the nature and degree of the social danger of the offence, all the circumstances of the case, and the information regarding the defendant’s personality: [he] has never incurred any criminal or administrative liability, he is not registered [as a drug addict or as a person suffering from psychotic disorders], he was given positive references by his neighbours and employers, [and] his military registration has been annulled because of a kidney disease. The court accepts the above-mentioned circumstances as mitigating the defendant’s guilt; however, it does not find any grounds for sentencing [him] to probation or imposing a fine on him, given the particular circumstances in which the offence was committed and the fact that [he] does not have a permanent place of residence in Moscow or in the Moscow Region”.
The applicant appealed, claiming in particular that he had been discriminated against by the trial court’s refusal to impose a non-custodial sentence on the grounds that he did not have a permanent residence in Moscow or in the Moscow Region, even though there had existed circumstances calling for the mitigation of his sentence.
On 29 August 2005 the Moscow City Court dismissed the appeal. It held, in a summary fashion, that the trial court had complied with every legal requirement and had issued a reasoned judgment, having sentenced the applicant to a term of imprisonment.
Article 73 of the Criminal Code (as worded at the relevant time) provided that a suspended sentence could be imposed when the actual sentence did not exceed eight years’ imprisonment and when the sentencing court was satisfied that the defendant could be rehabilitated without being incarcerated. When deciding whether to impose a suspended sentence, the court had to take into account the nature and degree of the social danger of the offence, the personality of the offender, and any mitigating and aggravating circumstances, as listed in Articles 61 and 63 of the Criminal Code.
When imposing a suspended sentence, a court ought to take into consideration the defendant’s age, state of health and ability to work and to be satisfied that the defendant would be able to comply with additional restrictions, such as the requirement not to change his or her place of permanent residence, employment or study without first notifying the probation authorities, not to be present in certain places or at certain events, or to undergo treatment against drug or alcohol addiction.
Article 63 provided an exhaustive list of aggravating circumstances. Residence outside the region where the offence was committed or where the trial was held was not listed among them.
Article 318 established that the use of violence against a State official that did not endanger that official’s life or health was punishable by a fine or by up to five years’ imprisonment.