The case originated in an application (no. 7973/10) directed against the Hellenic Republic of which twenty-three Greek nationals, named in the annex (“the applicants”), applied to the Court on 7 January 2010 under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”).
The applicants were represented by a non-governmental organisation, the Greek Helsinki Monitor (GHM), which is headquartered in Glyka Nera. The Greek Government (‘the Government’) was represented by the delegates of its Agent, Mrs V. Pelekou and Mr I. Bakopoulos, Assessors to the State Legal Council.
The applicants complained in particular of a violation of Article 14 of the Convention, in conjunction with Article 2 of Protocol 1 to the Convention.
On 21 October 2011, the complaint was communicated to the Government. As permitted in Article 29 § 1 of the Convention, it was further decided that the Chamber would rule simultaneously on the admissibility and merits of the case.
The town of Sofades is situated in the territory of Thessaly, in the centre of western Greece. According to the Government, almost half of the local population, about 3000 people, are of Roma origin and live in an urban area known as the new subdivision of Roma, ‘Nea Zoé’. According to the applications, 84 families live in the new subdivision and 300 families continue to live in an old subdivision.
At the time of the events, four primary public schools operated in Sofades in buildings managed by the municipality. One of them, the 4th primary school, was created by Presidential Decree No. 146 on 30 September 1986. In 1996, a new building was constructed. In addition to the twelve classrooms, the school had a gym, a computer lab and a courtyard. This school had been built in the old subdivision of the Roma community and was also close to the new subdivision ‘Nea Zoé’, which was associated with the area of this school, as defined by the school map (decision of 14 August 2008 by the head of the office of primary education in Karditsa).
According to the government, the number of pupils enrolled for the 2009-2010 school year rose to 511, and at the end of the school year, 127 pupils had completed their primary school studies in this school.
The applicants contest these facts. They state that, each year, about 200 pupils were enrolled in the 4th school but that they did not attend classes due to lack of space. They also specify that the Roma pupils living in the new subdivision situated, according to them, in the area of assignment for the 1st school, could not register for that one and that they had been transported by bus to the 4th school, which is 2.5 kilometres away, rather than the 1st school which is 2.4 kilometres away.
Following a merger in 2011, three primary schools currently exist in Sofades: the 1st school with 6 classes and 89 pupils, the 2nd with 12 classes and 193 pupils, and the 4th with 12 classes and 550 students, of which – according to the applicants – 250 regularly attend classes.
Fifteen of the applicants, who reside in the new subdivision, are students who had been the age of compulsory education in 2009-2010 and the eight others are their parents. Except for one kindergarten student, the other eleven applicants are enrolled in different classes in the following manner: seven in first, three in second, one in the third, two in the fourth, and two in the sixth.
All of the students, with the exception of Haralambos Kallioras and Dimitra Kalliora, whose primary education ended in 2009-2010, and Vasilika-Maria Kalliora, who, following a request from her parents was enrolled in the 2nd school of Sofades for 2010-2011, continued to be enrolled in the 4th school.
According to the Government, none of the concerned parents, except those of Vasiliki-Maria Kalliora, requested either the management of the 4th primary school or the management of primary education in Karditsa to transfer their children to another school in the area for 2009-2010 or for later on. The special secretary for intercultural education at the Ministry of Education confirmed in a letter of 19 December 2011 addressed to the Government that he had not received such requests.
On 21 May 2009, a delegation of the GHM went to the new Roma subdivision and the 4th school. On 30 May and 20 July 2009, respectively, the delegation wrote a letter addressed to Mr S.V., the special secretary for intercultural education at the Ministry of Education, and to Mr A.S., Minister of Education. The letter reads as follows:
“The children of the new subdivision of Sofades – with their homes of 140 m2 that the State and everyone considers as a model subdivision – do not attend, as provided by law, the 1st primary school of Sofades which is closer to them, but rather the 4th primary school – which is found in the old Roma subdivision – and which only welcomes Roma pupils. And further, students who are not of Roma ethnicity and live near the 4th primary school (...) attend the 1st primary school of Sofades. In other terms, there exists a clear ethnic segregation which violates both Greek law and standards of international human rights and, in particular, the European Convention for Human Rights, as it has been interpreted in the case Sampanis v. Greece (...).
The Roma children (...) have the right to attend the school closer to their residence and to not go to ‘schools for gypsy students’. In this latter category belongs the 4th primary school of Sofades and the 12th primary school of Aspropyrgos which are further from their place of residence than the 1st primary school of Sofades and the 10th primary school of Aspropyrgos. The teaching in these “schools for gypsy students” is either low-quality or inexistent. In any case, compulsory education is not an obligation solely for the parents but also for the State, which must ensure it even if the parents are negligent. The State should provide to teachers and to parents, respectively, special training and necessary support. (...)
We consider that the Christian Roma of Ehedoros, of Sofades, of Aspropyrgos and of Spata have the right to access, since September 2009, similar programs [to those which exist for Muslim children], so as to limit scholastic failure. Furthermore, the Roma children of these communities should be integrated into the schools closer to their subdivisions, schools which should not be “schools for gypsy students” (...).’
The letter remains without response.
On 27 August 2009, the GHM also wrote to the Ombudsman of the Republic without receiving a response.
The parents of the applicants allege that, on a date not specified in September 2009, they asked the director of the 1st primary school of Sofades to accept the enrolment of their children. He allegedly refused and maintained that the authorities considered that the children should continue to attend the 4th school.
On 29 September 2009, the Regional Directorate of Education in Thessaly addressed to the Ministry of Education a report on the function of the schools of Sofades and the education of Roma children, of which the relevant parts of the case read as follows:
“(...)
In the 4th primary school of Sofades, 511 pupils are enrolled, who attend their classes sporadically, in periods that depend on the movements of their Roma parents. The limits of the school districts associated with the 1st primary school, and the 2nd and 3rd school (who share locals and welcome, respectively, 82, 84, and 84 students) are resultantly fixed.
(...)
On 14 August 2008 (...), in order to put an end to social exclusion and to promote integration of Roma in all levels and in all activities of local society, we have thought it appropriate to emphasise (...) that the Roma should not be educated in schools with an exclusively Roma population and suggest the construction of new schools in order to proceed with a redistricting of the school district map.
The municipal board of Sofades sent us the minutes of their meeting of 18 December 2008 by which they let us know that they did not want the schools [4th primary school and the 4th kindergarten school] in the two Roma subdivisions to be eliminated (...).

  We responded to the municipality of Sofades on 5 June 2009, taking care not to come into conflict between it and the local society.
(...) it is our view that new schools should be build inside of the subdivision, with recreational and sports areas in accordance with the wishes of parents as expressed by our service and the prefect of Karditsa.
These new schools would contribute to the improvement of education offered to Roma children, to facilitate the collaboration and development of community activities with the other schools in the municipality of Sofades, and finally, to reinforce the harmonious coexistence between the two social groups. Only then, gradually and in the long term, can the integration of Roma children be realised in a nonviolent and effective manner.
The education of Roma children in the already-existing schools of Sofades (1st, 2nd, and 3rd) is considered impractible at the moment, because of the great number of students and the insufficiency of the infrastructure of these schools.
(...)
In September 2009, a parent of a Roma pupil filed a lease of a house (...) which is found in the sector of assignment for the 1st primary school of Sofades, so we have authorised the enrolment of the student in this school. We have, however, encountered vehement reactions on the part of parents of students at this school.
In addition, two Roma parents who reside in the old Roma subdivision of Sofades, where the 4th school is situated, asked that their children be registered in the school of the sector of Filia. At first, we approved this enrolment, but we have had vehement reactions from the parents of children in the primary school of Filia and the municipal authorities who demanded the return of the two students to the 4th school, on the grounds that their permanent residence is located in the old Roma subdivision of Sofades and not in the area of Filia.
(...)”
On 25 November 2009, the GHM sent a letter to the new special secretary for intercultural education at the Ministry of Education similar to the letter mentioned above, from 30 May and 20 July 2009, which remains also without response.
On 15 December 2009, the Ombudsman of the Republic informed the GHM that he had also written to the new special secretary for intercultural education to inform them of the new position of the new minister on this subject.
On a date not specified in 2009, the management of primary education in Karditsa stressed that, if one wanted to solve the problem of Roma exclusion, it was also necessary to stop schooling Roma children in Roma-only schools. The management proposed, to this effect, the construction of a new school outside of the old subdivision and a redrawing of the school district map.
On 7 December 2011, during a meeting in the office of the regional management of education in Thessaly, the competent services of the Ministry of Education proposed to take the following measures:
a) to transfer from the 1st January 2012 all the Roma children enrolled in the first grade of the 4th school to five other schools in the municipality of Sofades, namely the 1st and 2nd primary schools of Sofades and the primary schools of Kypseli, Karpochori and Mataraga, and to assign special teachers to these schools to facilitate their integration in these schools;
b) beginning with the 2012-2013 school year, to not enroll students beginning their primary school cycle in the 4th school, but to distribute them among the aforementioned schools.
On 23 December 2011, the special secretary for intercultural education decided to take the necessary measures for enforcing these propositions. The announcement of these measures in the local and national press provoked an outcry among the parents of non-Roma children, who expressed their opposition to any education of Roma children in classes attended by their children.
In a meeting of 26 January 2012 between the Minister of Education, the special secretary for intercultural education, the Mayor of Sofades, the representatives of Karditsa and the representatives of associations of the parents of students, it was decided to take the following measures: a) to maintain the 4th school in its current operating and to provide more amenities and teachers; b) to construct a new school for Roma children ; c) to enroll, if their parents wish it, nine students at the beginning of their schooling who are considered fit to study in preparatory classes which belonged to the 1st and 2nd schools, but who would work in the premises of the 5th kindergarten (situated in the new Roma subdivision and attended exclusively by Roma children) ; d) from the beginning of the school year 2012-2013, enrol the students from the 5th kindergarten into different primary schools of the town of Sofades, taking care that their number does not pass 20% of the total of students in every school.
On 13 February 2012, answering a question posed by a Greek deputy in the European Parliament concerning the measures adopted on 26 January 2012, the commissioner Viviane Reding highlighted that the European Commission considered that these measures were not sufficient enough to put an end to racial segregation, even if they reflected the willingness to address the problem.
According to Articles 7 § 1 and 8 of the Presidential Decree, no. 201/1998:
Article 7 § 1
“All children who have reached the age of compulsory schooling are enrolled in the first class of primary school. The registrations take place from the 1st to 15th of June of the previous school year (...)”
Article 8
“1. The transfers of students from one school to another are permitted in the following cases:
(...)
The creation of a new school in the sector where the home of the pupil is located, and in this case, after the fixing of the assignment of a new school, the transfer is obligatory and is effective without a request on the part of the parents or of a guardian.
(...)"
The circulation 11684//Γ1/10.09.2008 of the Ministry of National Education and Religious Affairs recommends that the Roma students are distributed between the classes because, “in accordance with the principles of intercultural education, in each school, the students relevant to intercultural education cannot pass 50% of the total number of students per class. In the case where their number exceeds this percentage by class, it should be informed to the advisor of education, who will deal with the problem”.
The circulation Φ.3/960/102679/Γ1/20.08.2010 of the same ministry, in its paragraph 12, states the following:
“It is recalled that the integration of Roma children into normal classes corresponds to a desire and a goal of the Ministry of Education, and that their exclusion and/or segregation compared to other students and their marginalisation are contrary to the Greek Constitution, to the law no. 3304/2005 which disallows the discrimination in matters of education for reasons of racial or national origin, as well as other international documents which bind the country and have supra-legislative power (for example, the European Convention on Human Rights and the United Nations Convention on the Rights of the Child).”
Article 45 of the legislative decree, number 18/1989, codifying the legal provisions relating to the Council of State, is as follows:
Incriminated Acts
“1.  The appeal for annulment for an abuse of power or violation of the law is only admissible against executory acts of administrative authorities and legal persons governed by public law who are not subject to appeal in any other jurisdiction.
(...)
In the case where the law requires an authority to settle a particular question by enacting an executive act subject to the provisions of paragraph 1, the appeal for annulment is admissible even against the failure of that authority to enact such an act.
The authority is presumed to refuse to enact the act when the special deadline fixed by the law expires, or after the expiration of a period of three months from the filing of the petition with the administration, which is required to issue an acknowledgement of receipt (...) indicating the day of said filing. An appeal for annulment exercised before the expiration of the aforementioned period is inadmissible.
An appeal for annulment validly lodged against an implicit refusal [of the administration] is equally an appeal against the negative act which, if need be, is subsequently adopted by the administration; however, this act can also be attacked separately”.
The recommendation CM/Rec(2009)4 for the Education of Roma and Travellers in Europe, adopted by the Committee of Ministers on 17 June 2009, at the 1061th meeting of the Delegation of Ministers, states in particular:
« (...)
Recommends that the governments of the member states, in respect to their constitutional structures, national or local circumstances, and their education system:
draw on the principles stated in the appendix to this recommendation in the context of ongoing or future educational reforms;
develop, disseminate, and implement educational policies to guarantee non-discriminatory access to quality education for Roma and Traveller children, based on the guidelines set out in the appendix to this recommendation;
(...)
ensure, including with local or regional authorities, an effective reception of Roma and Traveller children in the school environment;
(...)
Appendix to the Recommendation CM/REC(2009)4
Principles relating to the policies to be pursued
Educational policies to ensure non-discriminatory access to quality education for Roma and Traveller children should be developed at the national level. Such policies should be formulated to ensure access to quality education in dignity and respect, based on the principles of human rights and the rights of the child. (...)
(...)
The member states should ensure that legal measures prohibiting segregation on a racial or ethnic basis in the field of education are put in place with effective, proportionate, and dissuasive penalties, and ensure the effective implementation of legislation. When de facto segregation of Roma and Traveller children based on the racial or ethnic origin exists, the authorities should implement measures to abolish segregation. Policies and measures taken to combat segregation should be accompanied by appropriate training of educational staff and information for parents.
The educational authorities should establish assessment procedures to avoid any risk of placing children in special institutions on the basis of linguistic, ethnic, cultural, or social differences, and to facilitate access to schooling. Representatives of Roma and Travellers should be involved in the definition and monitoring of these procedures.
(...)
Structures and provisions for access to education
(...)
Roma and Travellers should enjoy unhindered access to mainstream education at all levels, following the same criteria as the majority of the population. To achieve this goal, inventive and flexible initiatives should be taken in terms of educational policies and practices. Appropriate measures should also be adopted to ensure equal access to all educational, cultural, linguistic, and vocational opportunities available to all learners, and especially the girls and women of the Roma and Traveller communities.
(...)
The access of Roma and Traveller children to a compulsory education must be facilitated and subject to the same criteria applicable to the majority population, placing special emphasis on the transition from preschool to primary education, and from primary to secondary education. Special measures should be taken to prevent dropping out and to encourage the return to school of children who have not completed compulsory education. (...) »
The report of the European Commission Against Racism and Intolerance (ECRI) on Greece, adopted on 2 April 2009 and published on 15 September 2009, states the following:
“53.  The ECRI notes, with concern, that Roma continue to be disadvantaged in the realm of education. Certain schools always refuse to enroll Roma children, which can sometimes be explained by the pressure exerted by the parents of non-Roma students. The ECRI is especially concerned about the fact that in certain cases, Roma children are separated from other children within the same establishment or nearby. In one case, the European Court of Human Rights found that Greece had violated Article 14 of the European Convention on Human Rights (prohibition of discrimination in the enjoyment of rights set forth in the Convention), taken together with Article 2 of Protocol no. 1 of the European Convention on Human Rights (right to education). The ECRI has learned that in Spata, where Roma children had initially been denied enrolment at the school, a separate class was created to accommodate them to allow them to gradually adapt to the school environment. While recognizing the necessity of progressive integration in the school system, the ECRI would like to draw attention to the Greek authorities to their opinion on this issue, as set out in General Policy Recommendation no. 10, on racism and racial discrimination in and throughout schooling and education. In this general policy recommendation, the ECRI recommends the creation of preparatory classes for pupils from minority groups in special and time-limited cases, if such a need is justified by objective and reasonable criteria, and if the best interests of the child command as such”.
Article 1 of this Convention states:
“(...) the expression “racial discrimination” aims at any distinction, exclusion, restriction, or preference founded on race, colour, ancestry, or national/ethnic origin, which has the purpose or effect of destroying or impairing the recognition, enjoyment, or exercise, on equal terms, of human rights and fundamental freedoms in political, economic, economic, social, and cultural areas or in any other areas of public life”.
In their General Recommendation no. 27 of 16 August 2000, concerning discrimination in regard to Roma, the Committee of the United Nations for the Elimination of Racial Discrimination advocates in particular the following measures in the area of education:
“18.  Prevent and avoid, as much as possible, the segregation of Roma pupils, while leaving open the possibility of a bilingual education or in the mother tongue; to this end, strive to improve the quality of education provided in all schools and to raise the level of achievement of pupils of the Roma minority, recruit school personnel from Roma communities and promote intercultural education”.
In their final observations of 11 April 2007, formulated at the end of the consideration of the report on the Czech Republic (doc. CERD/C/CZE/CO/7), the Committee in particular expressed its concern (paragraph 17) following reports of racial segregation of Roma in the area of education. The Committee noted that a large amount of Roma children is enrolled in ‘special schools’. Despite the fact that, as the Czech Republic argued, this situation resulted from the need to adopt measures adapted to their needs, it was also a consequence of discriminatory practices and a lack of sensitivity on the part of the authorities to cultural identity and the difficulties faced by the Roma. The Committee recommended that the Czech Republic increase their efforts in order to evaluate the situation of Roma in the area of education, to develop programs to end their segregation in this area, and to establish a method for determining when Roma children should be enrolled in special schools in order to avoid indirect discrimination on the basis of their cultural identity.
Article 1 of the Convention of 14 December 1960, concerning the fight against discrimination in the area of education provides that:
“1.  For the purposes of this Convention, the term “discrimination” includes any distinction, exclusion, limitation or preference which, based on race, colour, sex, language, religion, political opinion or all other opinion, national or social origin, economic condition or birth, has the purpose or effect of destroying or impairing equal treatment in education and, in particular:
(...)
Subject to the provisions of Article 2 of this Convention, to establish or maintain separate educational system or institutions for individuals or groups;
(...)”