The case originated in an application (no. 56666/12) against Bosnia and Herzegovina lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a citizen of Bosnia and Herzegovina, Mr Samir Šlaku (“the applicant”), on 8 August 2012.
The applicant was granted leave by the President to represent himself (Rule 36 § 2 of the Rules of Court). The Government of Bosnia and Herzegovina (“the Government”) were represented by their Deputy Agent, Ms Z. Ibrahimović.
The applicant complained of his ineligibility to stand for election to the House of Peoples and the Presidency of Bosnia and Herzegovina because he does not belong to any of the “constituent people”. He relied on Article 3 of Protocol No. 1 to the Convention taken alone and in conjunction with Article 14 of the Convention, and on Article 1 of ProtocolNo. 12.
On 2 September 2013 the application was communicated to the Government.
The applicant was born in 1963 and lives in Sarajevo.
The applicant belongs to BiH’s Albanian ethnic minority. He actively participates in the social and political life of the country.
On 26 August 2010 the applicant obtained written confirmation by the Central Election Commission that in accordance with the Constitution of Bosnia and Herzegovina members of ethnic minorities were ineligible to stand for election to the Presidency and the House of Peoples of the Parliamentary Assembly of Bosnia and Herzegovina.
The relevant law and practice were outlined in Sejdić and Finci v. Bosnia and Herzegovina ([GC], nos. 27996/06 and 34836/06, ECHR 2009). Notably, the Constitution of Bosnia and Herzegovina makes a distinction between “constituent peoples” (persons who declare affiliation with Bosniacs, Croats and Serbs) and “others” (members of ethnic minorities and persons who do not declare affiliation with any particular group because of intermarriage, mixed parenthood or other reasons).
In the former Yugoslavia, a person’s ethnic affiliation was decided solely by that person, through a system of self-classification. Thus, no objective criteria, such as knowledge of a certain language or belonging to a specific religion were required. Moreover, there was no requirement of acceptance by other members of the ethnic group in question. Since the Constitution contains no provisions regarding the determination of one’s ethnicity it appears that it was assumed that the traditional self-classification would suffice.
In accordance with the Constitution (Articles IV § 1 and V), only persons declaring affiliation with a “constituent people” are entitled to stand for election to the House of Peoples and the Presidency of Bosnia and Herzegovina.
On 29 June 2010 the Constitutional Court of Bosnia and Herzegovina (“the Constitutional Court”) declared that it lacked jurisdiction to examine a discrimination complaint concerning the appellant’s ineligibility to stand for election to the Presidency on the ground of his ethnic origin (decision no. AP 1945/10). The appellant in that case directly relied on the Sejdić and Finci judgment.
The Committee of Ministers of the Council of Europe, in its supervisory function under the terms of Article 46 § 2 of the Convention, adopted three interim resolutions concerning the implementation of Sejdić and Finci judgment (see documents nos. CM/ResDH(2011)291, CM/ResDH(2012)233 and CM/ResDH(2013)259), the relevant parts of which were reproduced in Zornić v. Bosnia and Herzegovina (no. 3681/06, § 12, 15 July 2014). It urged the authorities of Bosnia and Herzegovina to take all the necessary steps for the full execution of that judgment by adopting required measures aimed at eliminating discrimination against those who are not affiliated with a constituent people in standing for election to the House of Peoples and the Presidency of Bosnia and Herzegovina and to bring its constitution and electoral legislation in conformity with the Convention requirements without any further delay.
On 4 December 2014, at its 1214th meeting, the Committee of Ministers examined again the state of implementation of Sejdić and Finci and adopted the following decision:
“The Deputies
noted with profound concern and disappointment that the elections which took place in Bosnia and Herzegovina on 12 October 2014 were held under the same regulatory framework which the European Court found to be discriminatory;
encouraged therefore the authorities and political leaders of Bosnia and Herzegovina to give a fresh impetus to their endeavours and in particular to intensify their efforts to reach rapidly a consensus on the content of the constitutional and legislative amendments aimed at eliminating discrimination based on ethnic affiliation in elections for the Presidency and the House of Peoples of Bosnia and Herzegovina and to ensure that the necessary amendments are adopted as a matter of priority;
invited the authorities to take full advantage of the readiness of the Council of Europe to provide all necessary assistance and support both to them and to the political leaders of Bosnia and Herzegovina in their efforts to implement the present judgment;
decided to resume the consideration of this item at their 1229th meeting (June 2015) (DH) in light of the information to be provided by the authorities of Bosnia and Herzegovina.”