The case originated in fifty-one applications against the Russian Federation lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by seven Russian nationals (“the applicants”). The application numbers and the dates on which they were lodged with the Court, as well as the applicants’ full names and dates of birth, are listed in the Appendix.
The applicants were represented by Mr Daci and Mr Cron, lawyers practicing in Geneva. The Russian Government (“the Government”) were represented initially by Mr G. Matyushkin, Representative of the Russian Federation to the European Court of Human Rights, and then by his successor in that office, Mr M. Galperin.
The applicants complained of the ban on holding lesbian, gay, bisexual and transgender (LGBT) public events imposed by the domestic authorities and of a lack of effective remedies in that respect. They also alleged that the authorities treated in a discriminatory manner their requests to be permitted to hold these events.
On 15 January 2016 the applications were communicated to the Government.
The facts of the cases, as submitted by the parties, may be summarised as follows.
In 2009-14 the applicants lodged notices of the LGBT public assemblies indicated in the Appendix. In each instance the local authorities refused to approve the dates and locations proposed by the applicants, who challenged these decisions in the domestic courts under Chapter 25 of the Code of Civil Procedure. The domestic courts upheld the decisions of the local authorities. The judicial decisions in every case were taken after the respective dates of the originally proposed assemblies. The dates of the authorities’ refusals and the final domestic decisions are indicated in the Appendix.
For the relevant domestic law and practice, as well as international and comparative material, see Lashmankin and Others v. Russia, nos. 57818/09 and 14 others, §§ 21688 and §§ 313-24, 7 February 2017, and Alekseyev v. Russia, nos. 4916/07 and 2 others, §§ 49-52, 21 October 2010.