The case originated in an application (no. 20452/14) against the Hellenic Republic lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Greek national, Mrs Chatitze Molla Sali (“the applicant”), on 5 March 2014.
The applicant was represented by Mr Y. Ktistakis and Mr K. Tsitselikis, lawyers practising in Athens and Thessaloniki respectively. The Greek Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent’s Delegates, Mr K. Georghiadis and Ms V. Pelekou, Advisers at the State Legal Council, and Ms A. Magrippi, Legal Assistant at the State Legal Council.
The applicant alleged a violation of Article 6 § 1 of the Convention, taken alone and in conjunction with Article 14 and Article 1 of Protocol No. 1, in the context of a case concerning the inheritance rights to the property of her deceased husband.
The application was allocated to the First Section of the Court (Rule 52 § 1 of the Rules of Court). On 23 August 2016 the President of the Section decided, in accordance with Rule 54 § 2 (b), to give notice of the aforementioned complaints to the respondent Government. On 6 June 2017 a Chamber of that Section, composed of Kristina Pardalos, President, Linos-Alexandre Sicilianos, Ledi Bianku, Aleš Pejchal, Armen Harutyunyan, Pauline Koskelo and Tim Eicke, judges, and Renata Degener, Deputy Section Registrar, relinquished jurisdiction in favour of the Grand Chamber, neither of the parties having objected (Article 30 of the Convention and Rule 72).
The composition of the Grand Chamber was decided in accordance with the provisions of Article 26 §§ 4 and 5 of the Convention and Rule 24. Judge Pardalos, whose term of office expired in the course of the proceedings, continued to deal with the case (Article 23 § 3 of the Convention and Rule 23 § 4).
The applicant and the Government each filed written observations on the admissibility and merits of the case. Christian Concern, the Hellenic League for Human Rights and Greek Helsinki Monitor, which had all been given leave to intervene in the written procedure (Article 36 § 2 of the Convention and Rule 44 § 3), also submitted comments.
A hearing took place in public in the Human Rights Building, Strasbourg, on 6 December 2017.
There appeared before the Court:
The Court heard addresses by Mr Tsitselikis and Mr Ktistakis for the applicant, and by Ms Magrippi, Ms Telalian and Ms Pelekou for the Government, as well as their replies to the questions put by the judges.
The applicant was born in 1950 and lives in Komotini.
The applicant’s husband, Moustafa Molla Sali, a member of the Muslim community of Thrace, died on 21 March 2008. On 7 February 2003 he had drawn up a notarised public will in accordance with the relevant provisions of the Civil Code. He had bequeathed his whole estate to his wife, namely: one-third of a 2,000 sq. m plot of farmland near Komotini; one-half of a 127 sq. m apartment, a parking space and a basement in a block of flats in Komotini; one-quarter of a shop in Komotini with a surface area of 24 sq. m, and another shop measuring 31 sq. m in Komotini, which was subsequently expropriated in return for compensation that has already been paid to the applicant; and four properties in Istanbul.
By decision no. 12.785/2003 of 10 June 2008 the Komotini Court of First Instance, on the basis of a next-of-kin certificate submitted by the applicant, approved the will presented before it. On 6 April 2010 the applicant accepted her husband’s estate by notarised deed. The Treasury was notified and the applicant registered the property transferred to her with the Komotini Land Registry, paying the corresponding registration fees. It does not appear from the case file that the applicant had to pay any inheritance tax on the property transferred to her.
On 12 December 2009, meanwhile, the deceased’s two sisters had challenged the validity of the will before the Rodopi Court of First Instance. They asserted a claim to three-quarters of the property bequeathed. They submitted that they and the deceased belonged to the Thrace Muslim community and that therefore any questions relating to his estate were subject to Islamic religious law (Sharia law) and the jurisdiction of the mufti, rather than to the provisions of the Civil Code. They contended that the application of Muslim customs and Sharia law to Greek nationals of Muslim faith was laid down in the provisions of Article 14 § 1 of the 1920 Treaty of Sèvres (ratified by decree of 29 September/ 30 October 1923) and Articles 42 and 45 of the Treaty of Lausanne (ratified by decree of 25 August 1923) (see paragraphs 65-68 below). They argued that the law of succession applicable to Muslims was based on intestacy rather than testacy. Under Islamic law, where the deceased was survived by close relatives, the will only served to complement the intestate succession. Those provisions had continued to apply after the adoption of the Greek Civil Code, pursuant to section 6 of the Introductory Law to the Code, solely in respect of Greek nationals of Muslim faith living in Thrace.
By judgment no. 50/2010 of 1 June 2010, the Rodopi Court of First Instance dismissed the challenge brought by the deceased’s sisters. It held that applying the Islamic law of succession to Greek Muslims in such a way as to prevent them from disposing of their property in anticipation of their death gave rise to unacceptable discrimination on grounds of religious beliefs. It found that the consequent inability of such persons to draw up a public will was in breach of Article 4 (principle of equality), Article 5 § 1 (free development of personality), Article 5 § 2 (principle of non-discrimination) and Article 13 § 1 (freedom of religious conscience) of the Constitution, as well as Article 14 of the Convention and Article 1 of Protocol No. 1. The court emphasised that even if it should be inferred from section 5(2) of Law no. 1920/1991 (ratifying the Legislative Act of 24 December 1990 on Muslim ministers of religion) that inheritance matters for Muslims were governed by Sharia law, such law should be applied in a manner compatible with the Constitution and the Convention. The incompatibility in the present case had stemmed from interpreting the Islamic law of succession in such a way as to deprive the persons concerned of some of their civil rights, against their wishes. The court added that although the application of Sharia law was based, inter alia, on international law, and in particular on the combined effect of Articles 42 and 45 of the Treaty of Lausanne, it should not result in the Islamic law of succession being applied in such a way as to curtail the civil rights of Greek Muslims, because the aim of the treaty had not been to deprive the members of that minority of such rights, but to strengthen their protection.
The court pointed out that a Greek Muslim contacting a notary in order to draw up a public will was exercising his right to dispose of his property, in anticipation of his death, under the same conditions as other Greek citizens. It was consequently impossible to annul the will or to override any of its legal effects on the grounds that a will of that kind was prohibited by Sharia law. Upholding the claimants’ arguments would thus amount to introducing an unacceptable difference in treatment among Greek nationals on the grounds of their religious beliefs.
On 16 June 2010 the deceased’s sisters appealed against the aforementioned judgment.
On 28 September 2011 the Thrace Court of Appeal dismissed the appeal (judgment no. 392/2011). It emphasised, firstly, that the legislative provisions enacted pursuant to the Treaties of Sèvres and Lausanne had been intended to protect Greek nationals of Muslim faith and were in conformity with the Constitution and the Convention. That applied both to Islamic wills and to intestate succession, and the mufti had no jurisdiction in relation to public wills. The court held that since the testator was free to choose the type of will he wished to draw up in the exercise of his rights and therefore to draw up a public will in accordance with Article 1724 of the Civil Code, he was not obliged to follow Islamic law, which did not cover matters relating to such wills. Furthermore, the mufti had no jurisdiction over the testator’s wishes, which could not be circumscribed. Otherwise, there would be discrimination on grounds of religion, which was unlawful under the general rules on prohibition of discrimination.
More specifically, the Court of Appeal noted that the decision taken by the deceased, a Greek citizen of Muslim faith belonging to the Thrace Muslim religious minority, to ask a notary to draw up a public will, choosing personally to decide how and to whom he would bequeath his property, fell within his legal right to dispose of his property in anticipation of his death, under the same conditions as other Greek nationals.
On 23 January 2012 the deceased’s sisters lodged an appeal on points of law.
By judgment no. 1862/2013 of 7 October 2013 and on the basis of a provision of international law, namely Article 11 of the 1913 Treaty of Athens, and provisions of domestic law, namely section 4 of Law no. 147/1914, section 10 of Law no. 2345/1920 (enacted pursuant to the 1913 Treaty of Athens) and section 5(2) of Law no. 1920/1991 the Court of Cassation allowed the appeal. It noted that section 10 of Law no. 2345/1920 (on the provisional Arch-Mufti and muftis serving Muslims residing in the territory) reproduced the contents of Article 11 § 8.1 of the Treaty of Athens, pursuant to which muftis exercised their jurisdiction over Muslims in the spheres of marriage, divorce, maintenance payments, guardianship, trusteeship, capacity of minors, Islamic wills and intestate succession. It emphasised that the law governing interpersonal relations among Greek nationals of Muslim faith, as laid down in the above-mentioned treaty ratified by Greece, was, pursuant to Article 28 § 1 of the Constitution, an integral part of Greek domestic law and prevailed over any other legal provision to the contrary. Examining the reasoning of the Court of Appeal’s judgment, it concluded that that court’s determination of the case had breached the relevant legislative provisions, because the law applicable to the deceased person’s estate had been the Islamic law of succession, which formed part of domestic law and applied specifically to Greek nationals of Muslim faith. It noted that the estate in question belonged to the category of property held “in full ownership” (mulkia) – public land which had belonged to the Ottoman administration, the full ownership of which had been transferred to private individuals and which had been governed by Sharia law during the Ottoman occupation – and that, consequently, the impugned public will had to be deemed invalid and devoid of legal effect on the grounds that Sharia law recognised no such institution.
The Court of Cassation remitted the case to the Thrace Court of Appeal.
By judgment no. 183/2015 of 15 December 2015 the Court of Appeal set aside the judgment delivered by the Rodopi Court of First Instance on 1 June 2010. In line with the Court of Cassation’s judgment, it held that the relevant legislative provisions had been intended to protect Greek nationals of Muslim faith, constituted a special body of law and did not breach the principle of equality secured under Article 4 of the Constitution or the right of access to a court as guaranteed by Article 6 of the Convention. It pointed out that the law applicable to the deceased’s estate had been Sharia law, because the property bequeathed belonged to the “mulkia” category, and that consequently the public will at issue was devoid of legal effect because Sharia law did not recognise any such institution. It emphasised that the judgments of the Court of Cassation were binding on the courts to which cases were remitted as regards the legal issues determined by those judgments. It therefore considered itself bound by the Court of Cassation’s judgment of 7 October 2013 and could not overrule it, thus being unable to allow a request by the applicant to seek a preliminary ruling from the Court of Justice of the European Union concerning the interpretation of section 5(2) of Law no. 1920/1991 and of Article 45 of the Treaty of Lausanne. Since an appeal on points of law was lodged against that judgment, it was not immediately enforceable.
On 8 February 2016 the applicant appealed on points of law against the judgment of the Court of Appeal, and the hearing in the Court of Cassation was scheduled for 11 January 2017. She put forward a number of grounds of appeal.
In her first ground of appeal she submitted that the impugned judgment had been insufficiently reasoned as regards one specific point which she considered to have had a decisive influence on the outcome of the proceedings, namely that it had ignored the question whether her husband had been a “practising Muslim”, which was a precondition for the application of the special body of law.
The applicant’s second ground of appeal was that section 5(2) of Law no. 1920/1991 and certain Articles of the Civil Code had been incorrectly interpreted and applied. She submitted that the impugned judgment had extended the scope of the provisions creating a separate body of law for Greek nationals of Muslim faith to members of the Muslim community who did not faithfully adhere to Islamic doctrine.
The applicant argued in conclusion that those grounds of appeal had not been encompassed in the legal issue determined by judgment no. 1862/2013 of the Court of Cassation. She pointed out that that judgment had concerned Greek nationals of Muslim faith in general and had not addressed the matter of the law applicable to non-practising members of the Muslim community.
In her additional observations, the applicant contended that the case, which concerned the drawing up of a public will, a possibility afforded to all Greek citizens regardless of religious considerations, fell outside the mufti’s jurisdiction. The specific provisions concerning the Muslim minority could not, in her submission, be applied without violating the individual rights of Muslims as guaranteed under the Greek Constitution, as well as by Article 6 § 1 of the Convention and Article 1 of Protocol No. 1.
By judgment no. 556/2017 of 6 April 2017 the Court of Cassation dismissed the appeal on points of law. It did not refer to the Convention in its reasoning.
As regards the applicant’s first ground of appeal, it declared it inadmissible, finding that it was based on the extent of the deceased’s religious sentiment as a Muslim, a criterion that had no legal effect. It added that the deceased’s Greek nationality did not preclude the application of Sharia law.
As regards the second ground of appeal, the Court of Cassation held that the Court of Appeal’s judgment had contained sound reasons, in line with the Court of Cassation’s judgment no. 1862/2013. It emphasised that the Court of Appeal had assessed the facts of the case in the light of substantive law and had given sufficient reasons for its determination of the fundamental issue of recognising the invalidity of the will.
That judgment marked the end of the proceedings in respect of the property located in Greece.
As a result of the whole proceedings, the applicant was deprived of three-quarters of the property bequeathed.
In 2011, meanwhile, the testator’s sisters had applied to the Istanbul Civil Court of First Instance for the annulment of the will, in accordance with the principles of private international law enshrined in the Turkish Civil Code. They submitted that the will was contrary to Turkish public policy. Hearings were held on 9 February and 26 May 2016, but the court adjourned its consideration of the case on the grounds that the applicant still had to appeal on points of law against judgment no. 183/2015 of the Thrace Court of Appeal. The new hearing in the case was scheduled for 28 September 2017, and then adjourned until 18 January 2018. By the date of the present judgment the Court had yet to be informed of the progress of those proceedings.
The relevant Articles of the Constitution provide:
“1.  All Greeks are equal before the law.
Greek men and women have equal rights and equal obligations.
...”
“1.  All persons shall have the right to develop freely their personality and to participate in the social, economic and political life of the country, in so far as they do not infringe the rights of others or violate the Constitution and moral values.
All persons living within the Greek territory shall enjoy full protection of their life, honour and liberty irrespective of nationality, race or language and of religious or political beliefs. ...”
“Freedom of religious conscience is inviolable. The enjoyment of civil rights and liberties does not depend on the individual’s religious beliefs.”
“Every person shall be entitled to receive legal protection by the courts and may plead before them his views concerning his rights or interests, as specified by law.”
The relevant Articles of the Civil Code provide as follows:
“A public will shall be drawn up on the basis of a declaration of the testator’s final wishes, as received by a notary in the presence of three witnesses, or of a second notary and one witness, in accordance with the provisions of Articles 1725 to 1737.”
“Any notary with whom a will has been deposited must, on learning of the testator’s death, send a copy of the will to the registrar of the competent court of first instance, in the case of a public will ...
... The public will as transmitted to the registrar shall be opened during the court’s first hearing [after receipt of the will].”
“The court dealing with the inheritance shall issue the heir, at the latter’s request, with a certificate setting out his inheritance rights and the share of the estate bequeathed to him (inheritance certificate – κληρονομητήριο).”
Article 562 § 1 of the Code of Civil Procedure provides as follows:
“Any ground of appeal on points of law against a judgment delivered by the court to which a case has been remitted shall be inadmissible if it relates to a part of the judgment which is in conformity with the Court of Cassation judgment.”
Under the Islamic law of succession (Farâ’idh), intestate succession is the most common form of inheritance. Death results in the permanent cessation of legal relations between the deceased and third parties. Such third parties include the deceased’s heirs, who are treated as creditors. Any creditors other than the heirs are accorded a higher rank and must be prioritised, failing which any inheritance in favour of the heirs is null and void.
Male heirs have double the share in the estate as compared with female heirs. They are treated as “autonomous” heirs and are entitled to the portion of the estate remaining after those entitled to fractional shares have received them. The widow and daughters of the deceased are deemed to be entitled to fractional shares in the estate. Six types of fractional shares are possible: one-half, one-quarter, one-eighth, one-third, two-thirds and one-sixth. Thus, the widow will receive one-eighth of the estate, if there are any children, and one-quarter if there are none. If the deceased’s only child is female, she is entitled to half of the estate. If the deceased also has brothers and a mother, his daughter will receive one-sixth.
By judgment no. 152/1991, the Rodopi Court of First Instance ruled that the system of unequal shares in an estate under the intestate mode of succession was contrary to Article 4 § 2 of the Constitution, which guarantees gender equality.
Sharia law also provides for an Islamic will, although this is more akin to a legacy. Such a will is drawn up by the mufti himself or is made orally before two witnesses. It enables the person concerned to bequeath up to one-third of his property to third parties (other than his heirs) for charitable purposes.
A mufti is a Greek civil servant holding the rank of Director-General of Administration who is appointed by presidential decree on a proposal by the Minister of Education and Religious Affairs (regarding the role of the mufti, see also paragraphs 50 and 77 below).
The protection of the religious specificity of Greek Muslims is based on a series of international instruments (see paragraphs 62-65 below), as well as on section 4 of Law no. 147/1914 of 5 January 1914 on legislation applicable in the ceded territories and their judicial organisation (enacted pursuant to the Treaty of Athens, to which section 4(2) of the Law refers), which provides:
“All matters relating to the marriage of persons belonging to the Muslim or Jewish religion, that is to say all matters relating to the lawful contracting and dissolution of marriage and personal relations between spouses during their marital life, as well as kinship, shall be governed by religious law and adjudicated in conformity with such law.
As regards Muslims, the special conditions applicable to them as provided in the latest treaty between Greece and Turkey are also in force.”
When the Greek Civil Code was adopted in 1946, section 6 of the Introductory Law to the Code repealed section 4 of Law no. 147/1914 in respect of Greek nationals of Jewish faith only. However, section 8 of the Introductory Law to the Code maintained section 10(1) of Law no. 2345/1920, which was later superseded by section 5(2) of Law no. 1920/1991 (see paragraph 45 below).
Section 5(2) of Law no. 1920/1991 ratifying the Legislative Act of 24 December 1990 on Muslim ministers of religion provides:
“The mufti’s jurisdiction applies to Greek citizens of Muslim faith resident in his region, in the spheres of marriage, divorce, maintenance payments, guardianship, trusteeship, capacity of minors, Islamic wills and intestate succession, where such matters are governed by Islamic holy law”.
Section 5(3) of the same Law provides as follows:
“Decisions given by the mufti in cases where his jurisdiction is contested cannot be enforced and do not constitute res judicata unless they have been declared enforceable by the court of first instance, sitting in single-judge formation, of the region for which the mufti is responsible, under a non-contentious procedure. The court will only consider whether the decision was given within the bounds of the mufti’s jurisdiction and whether the provisions applied were in conformity with the Constitution. The court’s judgment may be challenged before a bench of the same court, which shall adjudicate in accordance with the same procedure. The judgment of the bench shall not be open to ordinary or extraordinary appeal.”
The highest Greek courts disagree as to whether the Treaty of Athens is still in force and as to its scope. The Supreme Administrative Court has ruled that the provisions of the Treaty of Lausanne on protecting minorities are based on the principle of equal treatment of members of minorities and other citizens in the exercise of their civil and political rights. Consequently, in its view, Article 11 of the Treaty of Athens is not compatible with the aforementioned principle and is therefore no longer applicable (judgments nos. 1333/2001 and 466/2003). On the other hand, according to the settled case-law of the civil bench of the Court of Cassation, the Treaty of Athens is the legal basis for the protection of minorities in Greece, and the international obligation to apply Sharia law flows from that treaty (judgments nos. 231/1932, 105/1937, 14/1938, 322/1960, 738/1967, 1723/1980, 1041/2000, 1097/2007 and 2113/2009).
The civil bench of the Court of Cassation has also held that the status granted to Greek Muslims under the Treaties of Sèvres and Lausanne did not lapse as a result of the adoption of the Civil Code in 1946 (see paragraph 41 above). It has noted that only the part of section 4 of Law no. 147/1914 concerning the Jewish community, and not that regarding the Muslim community, was repealed. It has also found that although Law no. 1920/1991 repealed section 10(1) of Law no. 2345/1920 (see paragraph 41 above), it incorporated the contents of that provision into its own section 5(2). The Court of Cassation has emphasised that the aforementioned legislative provisions, which had been introduced pursuant to the Treaties of Sèvres and Lausanne, were intended to protect Greek Muslims, amounted to a special law applicable to interpersonal relations and were not contrary to Article 4 § 1 of the Constitution (principle of equality), Article 20 § 1 of the Constitution (right to judicial protection), or Article 6 § 1 of the Convention (see, for example, judgment no. 2138/2013 of the Court of Cassation of 5 December 2013).
The Civil bench of the Court of Cassation has accepted that Sharia law applies subject to its compatibility with the Constitution and with international law, a question that has to be decided by the domestic courts when assessing the enforceability of decisions given by the mufti. In its aforementioned judgment no. 2138/2013 it held:
“... it appears that Muslim family relations are subject to the rules of their religious tradition (in so far as they are compatible with higher-ranking legal rules, such as the provisions of the Constitution and contemporary international law). It also appears that one indispensable element of that tradition is the jurisdiction of their ministers of religion, who alone have competence either to adjudicate on the content of religious rules, or to interpret and apply them to each individual case.”
On the other hand, the criminal bench of the Court of Cassation has held that section 5(2) of Law no. 1920/1991 is a procedural provision which cannot create any substantive legal rule (judgment no. 1588/2011). It has ruled that the question of maintenance payments to a Muslim’s wife and children should be settled by the civil courts and not by the mufti.
Studying the case-law of the courts of first instance on this subject, legal commentators have noted that those courts do not in fact perform a proper review of constitutionality, but in most cases formally ratify the mufti’s decision. Between 2007 and 2014, for example, the Xanthi and Rodopi courts declared enforceable 390 decisions by the Mufti of Xanthi and 476 decisions by the Mufti of Komotini respectively, and refused to do so in 34 and 17 cases respectively.
In an opinion issued on 3 November 1953 the plenary State Legal Council held that section 4 of Law no. 147/1914 – in so far as it related to the law of succession applicable to Greek Muslims – and a number of other provisions were no longer based on the international treaties in force on the date of adoption of the Civil Code and should therefore be deemed to have lapsed. The State Legal Council held that Article 11 of the Treaty of Athens had been tacitly abrogated by the subsequent Treaties of Sèvres and Lausanne. It added that the repeal of section 4 of Law no. 147/1914 and of certain provisions of other laws (governing matters pertaining to respect for the customs of the Muslim minority) as a result of the adoption of the Civil Code, which was applicable to all Greek nationals and all family-law matters, should not be considered contrary to the Treaty of Lausanne. Lastly, it noted that Turkey’s repeal of the provisions applicable to its own minorities and Greece’s acceptance of that situation supported the conclusion that the entry into force of a single Civil Code compatible with prevailing conceptions in western European civilisation was not in breach of the Treaty of Lausanne. Accordingly, when imposing inheritance tax, the tax authorities should take the view that Greek Muslims inherited in accordance with the provisions of the Civil Code.
It also appears from the case-law of the Greek lower courts that the jurisdiction of the mufti and the application of Sharia law are limited by the constitutional and international obligations in force in the national legal system, requiring the State, in the event of a conflict between that law and civil rights, to secure the latter to Muslim Greek citizens by applying the Greek Civil Code (judgment no. 9/2008 of the Rodopi Court of First Instance).
By judgment no. 7/2001 the Thrace Court of Appeal ruled that matters of family law and inheritance law falling within the mufti’s jurisdiction were strictly defined and circumscribed because they had given rise to an exceptional body of law an extensive interpretation of which could not be tolerated.
By decision no. 1623/2003 ordering interim measures, the Xanthi Court of First Instance held that where Greek nationals of Muslim faith opted to contract a civil marriage, all matters coming under family law, including those listed in section 5(2), were governed not by Sharia law but by the rules of ordinary law and fell under the jurisdiction of the ordinary courts. The Xanthi Court of First Instance also ruled that freedom of religion and the principle of equality afford all Greek citizens the right to choose whatever type of marriage they wish and, if they opt for civil marriage, the right to have the corresponding law applied to their situation.
By judgment no. 102/2012, the Xanthi Court of First Instance also ruled that the deprivation of the rights of Greek Muslim women or their unequal treatment could not be found to be justified by special circumstances or necessary on public-interest grounds overriding fundamental rights, gender equality and equality before the law. However, that judgment was overturned by the Thrace Court of Appeal (judgment no. 178/2015).
Moreover, in the instant case (see paragraph 15 above), the Thrace Court of Appeal has ruled that the mufti has no jurisdiction regarding inheritance by public will, and that the deceased’s wishes cannot be restricted by the mufti’s jurisdiction, as that would amount to discrimination on grounds of religion. It has also noted that Sharia law is a special body of law whose interpretation has the effect of depriving Muslims of their rights against their wishes (judgment no. 392/2011).
Since 1960, the established case-law of the civil bench of the Court of Cassation, for its part, has tended to apply Sharia law to intestate succession concerning property held “in full ownership” (judgments nos. 321/1960, 1041/2000, 1097/2007, 2113/2009, 1497/2013 and 1370/2014). By judgment no. 1097/2007 of 16 May 2007, the Court of Cassation held that the estate of Greek Muslims concerning unencumbered property was strictly governed by “Islamic holy law” and not by the Civil Code. Furthermore, on 7 February 2017 it reiterated that Sharia law was the only law applicable to Greek Muslims in the sphere of intestate succession.
In a “written contribution” on the implementation of the International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination in Greece, submitted in July 2016 to the United Nations Committee on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination, the National Commission for Human Rights pointed out that the authorities were continuing not to apply Greek civil law relating to marriage and inheritance to the Thrace Muslim minority, and that the application of Sharia law was incompatible with the provisions of the International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination. It expressed its concern as regards the Court of Cassation’s judgment no. 1862/2013 in the present case (see paragraph 18 above), which it said had set a precedent liable to affect judicial practice in Greece and breached the right of members of the Thrace Muslim minority to make a will in accordance with civil law, a right which they had been able to exercise since 1946 (Annual Report of the National Commission for Human Rights, 2016, p. 239).
The relevant provisions of Law no. 4511/2018, which came into force on 15 January 2018, read as follows:
“1.  The following subsection 4 shall be added at the end of section 5 of the Legislative Act of 24 December 1990 ...:
.Any wills drawn up before the entry into force of this Law in respect of which the property has not yet been transferred shall normally take legal effect at the time they are opened.
...”
The explanatory report on Law no. 4511/2018 pointed out that case-law and legal opinion had dealt with various aspects of the application of Sharia law and the issue of the hierarchy of certain provisions and their ranking in the domestic legal order, as well as their conformity with the Constitution and European human rights standards. This issue is still relevant, bearing in mind the developments in legal opinion and case-law on such matters and the interaction between the case-law of the Greek courts and that of the international courts.
The report acknowledged that the State had not acted on this matter for ninety-seven years, during which time conceptions, practices and traditions had evolved at both international and national levels.
The report pointed out that the State should not be a mere onlooker during a legal debate and should no longer leave it to the judiciary to resolve important issues that affected Greek citizens.
By the date of adoption of the present judgment the decree mentioned in section 1(4)(b) of the Law had apparently not yet been issued.
The protection of the religious distinctiveness of Greek Muslims is based on three international treaties: the Treaty of Athens of 14 November 1913, which was intended to strengthen peace and friendship between Greece and Turkey, the Treaty of Sèvres of 10 August 1920 concerning the protection of minorities (concluded between, on the one hand, Greece, and on the other, the British Empire, France, Italy and Japan), and the Lausanne Peace Treaty of 24 July 1923 (concluded between, on the one hand, the British Empire, France, Italy, Japan, Greece, Romania and the Serb-Croat-Slovene State and, on the other, Turkey).
Article 11 of the Treaty of Athens provides:
“8.1. The muftis, in addition to their authority over purely religious affairs and their supervision of the administration of vakouf [public] property, shall exercise jurisdiction between Muslims in matters of marriage, divorce, maintenance payments (néfaca), guardianship, trusteeship, emancipation of minors, Islamic wills, and succession to the position of Mutevelli (tevliet).
2. The judgments rendered by the muftis shall be executed by the proper Greek authorities.
As to matters of inheritance, the interested Muslim parties may, after agreeing thereto, resort to the mufti as an arbitrator. All methods of appeal practiced before the national courts shall be applicable to the arbitral decision thus rendered unless there is a clause expressly providing to the contrary.”
Article 14 § 1 of the Treaty of Sèvres provided as follows:
“Greece agrees to take all necessary measures in relation to Moslems to enable questions of family law and personal status to be regulated in accordance with Moslem usage.”
The Treaty of Lausanne provides, in particular:
“The Turkish Government undertakes to take, as regards the non-Moslem minorities, in so far as concerns their family law or personal status, measures permitting the settlement of these questions in accordance with the customs of those minorities.”
“Turkish nationals belonging to non-Moslem minorities shall not be compelled to perform any act which constitutes a violation of their faith or religious observance, and shall not be placed under any disability by reason of their refusal to attend Courts of Law or to perform any legal business on their weekly day of rest.
This provision, however, shall not exempt such Turkish nationals from such obligations as shall be imposed upon all other Turkish nationals for the preservation of public order.”
“The rights conferred by the provisions of the present Section on the non-Moslem minorities of Turkey will be similarly conferred by Greece on the Moslem minority in her territory.”
Article 30 (application of successive treaties relating to the same subject-matter) of the Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties of 23 May 1969 provides:
“1. Subject to Article 103 of the Charter of the United Nations, the rights and obligations of States parties to successive treaties relating to the same subject-matter shall be determined in accordance with the following paragraphs.
When a treaty specifies that it is subject to, or that it is not to be considered as incompatible with, an earlier or later treaty, the provisions of that other treaty prevail.
When all the parties to the earlier treaty are parties also to the later treaty but the earlier treaty is not terminated or suspended in operation under article 59, the earlier treaty applies only to the extent that its provisions are compatible with those of the later treaty.”
Article 3 § 1 of this Convention, which was adopted in 1995 and came into force on 1 February 1998 (and has been signed but not ratified by Greece), provides:
The explanatory report on the Framework Convention emphasises that Article 3 § 1 “firstly guarantees to every person belonging to a national minority the freedom to choose to be treated or not to be treated as such. This provision leaves it to every such person to decide whether or not he or she wishes to come under the protection flowing from the principles of the framework Convention” (§ 34). The report specifies that that paragraph “does not imply a right for an individual to choose arbitrarily to belong to any national minority. The individual’s subjective choice is inseparably linked to objective criteria relevant to the person’s identity” (§ 35). It adds that paragraph 1 “further provides that no disadvantage shall arise from the free choice it guarantees, or from the exercise of the rights which are connected to that choice [and that t]his ... provision aims to secure that the enjoyment of the freedom to choose shall also not be impaired indirectly” (§ 36).
In its 2018 General comment No. 6 on equality and non-discrimination, adopted on 26 April 2018, the Committee on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities reaffirmed its view that the concept of “discrimination” includes discrimination against:
In its concluding comments of 2 February 2007 on Greece the Committee voiced its concern about the non-application of Greek legislation on marriage and inheritance to the Muslim minority, fearing that that situation amounted to discrimination against Muslim women in breach of the Greek Constitution and Article 16 of the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women.
In its concluding observations on the seventh periodic report by Greece, adopted at its fifty-fourth session (11 February – 1 March 2013), the Committee noted the following:
“36.  The Committee is concerned about the situation of women in the State party in the area of marriage and inheritance. The Committee remains concerned about the inconsistent application of the State law in all communities. In this regard, the Committee is concerned about the non-application of the general law of the State party to the Muslim community of Thrace regarding marriage and inheritance ...
The Committee recommends that the State party:
...”
In a document of 25 April 2005 entitled “Consideration of reports submitted by States Parties under Article 40 of the Covenant”, the Human Rights Committee noted the following as regards Greece:
“8.  The Committee is concerned about the impediments that Muslim women might face as a result of the non-application of the general law of Greece to the Muslim minority on matters such as marriage and inheritance (arts. 3 and 23).
The Committee urges the State party to increase the awareness of Muslim women of their rights and the availability of remedies and to ensure that they benefit from the provisions of Greek civil law.”
In a subsequent follow-up document dated 23 January 2014, the Human Rights Committee reproduced the Greek Government’s reply, as follows:
“Application of Sharia law in family and inheritance law matters of members of the Muslim minority in Thrace (para. 8 of the Committee’s concluding observations)
The law provides for the potential application of the Sharia law in family and inheritance law matters of members of the Muslim minority in Thrace. The choice whether to use Sharia law or the Greek Civil Code in the above mentioned matters is made by the members of the Muslim minority themselves. As shown, over the last years, by cases involving women from the minority, this option is a fact of life in Thrace.
Members of the Muslim minority in Thrace are absolutely free to address themselves either to the civil courts or the local Muftis. In case they choose the former, the general legislation is applied. In case they choose the latter, the Sharia law is implemented to the extent that its rules are not in conflict with fundamental values of the Greek society and the Greek legal and constitutional order. The law provides that the courts shall not enforce decisions of the Muftis which are contrary to the Greek Constitution. In this respect, derogations from civil law provisions are minor: concepts such as polygamy, marriage below legal age without court permission, marriage by proxy, repudiation, etc. are not allowed, on the basis of the aforementioned principle.
Greece is firmly committed to strengthening the substantive review and control, by domestic Courts, of Muftis’ decisions on these matters, thus ensuring that their legal effect and/or implementation do not contravene the Constitution and the relevant universal and regional human rights treaties, particularly as regards the rights of women and children.
Bearing in mind the expressed preferences and visible trends within the majority of the Muslim minority on religious, social and legal matters, Greece will also consider and study possible re-adjustments with regard to the application of the Sharia Law in Thrace, taking hereby into account its legal obligations and the potential changes of the wishes of the Muslim minority itself.
Finally, it is important to clarify that in Greece there are no ‘parallel legal orders’ or ‘separate societies’, depending on the religious affiliation of Greek citizens. Muslim women of the minority are fully included in gender equality policies and participate in relevant programs implemented by the competent authorities.”
Commissioner Thomas Hammarberg and his delegation visited Greece, including the Evros region, from 8 to 10 December 2008. In the course of this visit the Commissioner held discussions with State authorities and non-governmental, national and international organisations on certain human rights issues, including the rights of minorities. The Commissioner also met members of minority groups.
In his report the Commissioner highlighted the following points:
“...
Muftis and application of the Sharia Law in Greece: the Commissioner takes note of the very serious concerns that have been expressed by competent national and international organisations about the application to Muslim Greek citizens in Thrace of the Sharia Law in family and inheritance law matters by Muftis who are appointed by the Greek state. Given the issues of incompatibility of this practice with European and international human rights standards, the Commissioner recommends its review by the authorities, institutionalising at the same time an open and continuous dialogue with representatives of the Muslim minority on all matters affecting their everyday life and human rights, in accordance with the Council of Europe’s standards.
...
The Commissioner has noted that in 2007 the United Nations Committee on the Elimination of Discrimination against Women (CEDAW) expressed its concern about ‘the non-application of the general law of Greece to the Muslim minority on matters of marriage and inheritance’, thus leading ‘to discrimination against Muslim women, in contravention of the Greek Constitution and article 16 of the [Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women] ...
The Commissioner is aware that the decision to proceed to the application of Sharia Law in family and inheritance law matters may be taken by members of the Muslim minority in Thrace, who have, in principle, the right to choose between Greek civil law and Sharia Law. It is to be noted, however, that exceptions occur in matters relating to inheritance law, where Sharia Law is strictly applied. The Commissioner is also informed that Sharia Law should be implemented, as a matter of principle, to the extent that its rules are not in conflict with the Greek statutory and constitutional order. In fact, Law 1920/1991 (on Muftis) provides that the domestic courts, in cases of dispute, shall not enforce decisions of the Muftis which are contrary to the Greek Constitution. A recent legal expert report, however, has cast very serious doubts over and raised grave concerns about the effectiveness of the review and control of the Mufti judicial decisions which is carried out by domestic civil courts.
The Commissioner shares the comments of the above competent national and international human rights institutions whose reports have clearly indicated that the Sharia Law-related practice as outlined above, based notably on early 20th century treaties concluded between Greece and the Ottoman Empire and later Turkey, raises serious issues of compatibility with the undertakings of Greece following the ratification of the post-1948, core international and European human rights treaties, especially those relating to the human rights of the child and of women, which should, in any case, be effectively applied and prevail.
On many occasions during the discussion that the Commissioner held in Alexandroupolis with the aforementioned members of the Muslim minority the wish for a prevalence of and application of the ‘European standards’ to the Muslim minority members was stressed. In these discussions, the Commissioner was given the impression that there are many Muslim minority members who do not wish to be subject, even with the right to choose, to Sharia Law and would very much welcome its abolition in Greece. At the same time, such a development could well pave the way towards a possible direct election of a Mufti by members of the Muslim minority, a prospect that appears also to be wished for by the majority of this minority.
Conclusions and recommendations
...
The Commissioner wishes to underline in this context that any obligations that may arise out of the 1923 Lausanne Peace Treaty, or any other early 20th century treaty, should be viewed and interpreted in full and effective compliance with the subsequent obligations undertaken by the ratification of European and international human rights instruments.”
In a report issued on 21 April 2009 entitled “Freedom of religion and other human rights of non-Muslim minorities in Turkey and of the Muslim minority in Thrace (eastern Greece)”, the Committee on Legal Affairs and Human Rights of the Parliamentary Assembly noted the following:
“55.  The implementation of Sharia Law can also raise problems, and the rapporteur is particularly concerned about information from one of the Committee’s experts to the effect that 99% of the muftis’ decisions are ratified by the Greek courts, even where they infringe women’s and children’s rights as laid down in the constitution or the ECHR.”
On 27 January 2016 a motion for a resolution entitled “Compatibility of Sharia law with the European Convention on Human Rights: can States Parties to the Convention be signatories of the ‘Cairo Declaration’ was transmitted to the Committee on Legal Affairs and Human Rights for report. At its meeting in Strasbourg on 19 April 2016 the Committee accordingly appointed a rapporteur. In an introductory memorandum of 7 October 2016 the rapporteur noted the following:
“...
Application of Sharia law on all or part of the territory of a Council of Europe member State
1. Western Thrace in Greece
Under the Treaty of Lausanne of 24 July 1923, the Greek State recognised the existence of only one minority on Greek territory, namely the ‘Muslim’ minority of Western Thrace in north-eastern Greece. The ‘Muslim inhabitants of Western Thrace’ and the ‘Greek inhabitants of Constantinople’ were expressly excluded from the compulsory population exchange between Greece and Turkey that took place under the Convention Concerning the Exchange of Greek and Turkish Populations signed in Lausanne on 30 January 1923. Greek law allows Greek citizens who are Muslims and resident in Western Thrace to use Sharia law as a parallel legal system for private law. The law gives muftis judicial power to rule on disputes between Muslims concerning inheritance (Law No. 2345/1920).
Since 1990 there have been five muftis in Thrace: three officially appointed by the Greek State and two elected by the minority but not recognised by the Greek authorities, which has given rise to disputes and led the European Court of Human Rights to find violations of Article 9 of the Convention.
In theory, every Muslim citizen in Greece is able to choose freely between a mufti and a Greek court. However, this right to choose is interpreted very narrowly by the Greek Supreme Court, and the coexistence of this parallel legal system has been much criticised. In its Judgment No. 1097/2007 of 16 May 2007, the Greek Supreme Court acknowledged that for Greek Muslims inheritance of unencumbered property was strictly governed by ‘Islamic holy law’ and not the Greek Civil Code. Under ‘Islamic holy law’ it is not possible, amongst other things, to inherit through a will. ...
Furthermore, the application of Sharia law in Western Thrace is prejudicial to women. It should be pointed out that muftis have officiated at a number of Muslim weddings by proxy, without the express consent of the brides, who are sometimes even underage girls. As regards matters of inheritance, an application against Greece has been lodged with the European Court of Human Rights by a woman who is a member of the Muslim minority. The applicant is challenging the ruling of the Greek Supreme Court that the will of a deceased Muslim citizen in favour of his wife was invalid on the ground that it was against Sharia law.
Lastly, the Commissioner for Human Rights of the Council of Europe has clearly stated that he is ‘favourably positioned towards the withdrawal of the judicial competence from muftis, given the serious, aforementioned issues of compatibility of this practice with international and European human rights standards’.”
The relevant provisions of the Charter of Fundamental Rights of the European Union (2000/C 364/01) read as follows:
Article 21
Non-discrimination
“1. Any discrimination based on any ground such as sex, race, colour, ethnic or social origin, genetic features, language, religion or belief, political or any other opinion, membership of a national minority, property, birth, disability, age or sexual orientation shall be prohibited.
Within the scope of application of the Treaty establishing the European Community and of the Treaty on European Union, and without prejudice to the special provisions of those Treaties, any discrimination on grounds of nationality shall be prohibited.”
Furthermore, Council Directive 2000/78/EC of 27 November 2000 establishing a general framework for equal treatment in employment and occupation provides that:
Article 1
Purpose
“The purpose of this Directive is to lay down a general framework for combating discrimination on the grounds of religion or belief, disability, age or sexual orientation as regards employment and occupation, with a view to putting into effect in the Member States the principle of equal treatment.”
Article 2
Concept of discrimination
“1. For the purposes of this Directive, the "principle of equal treatment" shall mean that there shall be no direct or indirect discrimination whatsoever on any of the grounds referred to in Article 1.
For the purposes of paragraph 1:
(a) direct discrimination shall be taken to occur where one person is treated less favourably than another is, has been or would be treated in a comparable situation, on any of the grounds referred to in Article 1;
...”
On 17 July 2008, in case no. C-303/06, S. Coleman v Attridge Law and Steve Law (ECLI:EU:C:2008:415), the Grand Chamber of the Court of Justice of the European Union addressed the question whether Directive 2000/78 of 27 November 2000 establishing a general framework for equal treatment in employment and occupation, should be interpreted as prohibiting direct discrimination, in that case on grounds of disability, only in respect of an employee who himself has the protected characteristic, or whether the principle of equal treatment and the prohibition of direct discrimination applied equally to an employee who is treated less favourably by reason of the disability of his child, for whom he is the primary provider of the care required by virtue of the child’s condition. In this connection, the CJEU concluded:
On 16 July 2015, in case no. C83/14, CHEZ Razpredelenie Bulgaria AD, ECLI:EU:C:2015:480, the Grand Chamber of the CJEU addressed the question of discrimination by association on the grounds of ethnic origin relating to the interpretation of the Directive 2000/43/EC of 29 June 2000, implementing the principle of equal treatment between persons irrespective of racial or ethnic origin, and the Charter of Fundamental Rights of the European Union, in particular whether the principle of equal treatment should benefit only persons who actually possess the racial or ethnic origin concerned or also persons who, although not being of the racial or ethnic origin in question, nevertheless suffer less favorable treatment on those grounds. The relevant part of the judgment reads:
It appears from the documents available to the Court concerning the legislation of Council of Europe member States that Sharia law can be applied in all those States as a source of foreign law in the event of a conflict of laws in the context of private international law. In such cases, however, Islamic law is not applied as such but as the law of a (non-European) sovereign State, subject to the requirements of public-policy. Outside the sphere of private international law, only one State (France) has officially applied some provisions of Sharia law to citizens of one of its overseas territories (Mayotte). However, the application of those provisions was limited and ended in 2011.
In another State (the United Kingdom), in May 2016 the government commissioned an independent review into the application of Sharia law (in England and Wales) in order to consider “whether Sharia law is being misused or applied in a way that is incompatible with the domestic law in England and Wales, and in particular whether there were discriminatory practices against women who use sharia councils”. In its report of February 2018, that independent review explained that “Sharia councils have no legal status and no legal binding authority under civil law. Whilst sharia is a source of guidance for many Muslims, sharia councils have no legal jurisdiction in England and Wales. Thus if any decisions or recommendations are made by a sharia council that are inconsistent with domestic law (including equality policies such as the Equality Act 2010) domestic law will prevail. Sharia councils will be acting illegally should they seek to exclude domestic law. Although they claim no binding legal authority, they do in fact act in a decision-making capacity when dealing with Islamic divorce.”