The case originated in an application (no. 552/10) against the Hellenic Republic lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Greek national, Mr I.B. (“the applicant”), on 2 December 2009. The President of the Section acceded to the applicant’s request not to have his name disclosed (Rule 47 § 4 of the Rules of Court).
The applicant was represented by Mr G. Letsas and Ms. V. Mantouvalou, lawyers practising in London. The Greek Government (“the Government”) were represented by the delegates of their Agents, Ms G. Papadaki, Adviser at the State Legal Council, and Ms M. Germani, Legal Assistant at the State Legal Council.
The applicant alleged, in particular, a violation of Article 14 of the Convention taken in conjunction with Article 8.
By a decision of 28 August 2012, the Chamber declared the application partly admissible.
The applicant and the Government each filed further observations (Rule 59 § 1).
The applicant was born in 1980 and lives in Athens.
The applicant had been working for a jewellery manufacturing company since 2001. On 4 March 2003 he resigned from his post in order to carry out his military service. Afterwards he contacted S.K., the owner of the company, who hired him again on a full-time basis from 1 July 2004 on a monthly salary of 722.92 euros (EUR).
In January 2005 the applicant told three of his colleagues – I.M., S.M. and O.G. – that he feared he had contracted the human immunodeficiency virus (HIV). On 11 February 2005, while he was on annual leave, that fear was confirmed by a test establishing that he was indeed HIV-positive. On 15 February his employer, S.K., received a letter from the three above-mentioned employees in which they told her that the applicant “had Aids” and that the company should dismiss him before the end of his annual leave. All three colleagues had tested negative for Aids.
In the meantime information about the applicant’s health condition had spread throughout the entire company of seventy employees. The staff started complaining to their employer about having to work with a colleague who was HIV-positive and demanded his dismissal. S.K. then invited an occupational-health doctor to come to the company premises and talk to the staff about HIV and how it could be transmitted. The doctor attempted to reassure the staff by explaining the precautions to be taken but they continued to demand the applicant’s dismissal. S.K. then considered transferring the applicant to another department at a different location, but the head of that department threatened to resign if the applicant joined his team. S.K. then offered to help the applicant set up his own business if he would tender his resignation. She also offered to pay for him to attend a training course in hairdressing. The applicant refused her offers however.
On 21 February 2005 thirty-three employees of the company (approximately half the total number of staff) sent a letter to S.K. asking her to dismiss the applicant in order to “preserve their health and their right to work”, failing which the harmonious atmosphere in the company would, in their view, be liable to deteriorate. On 23 February 2005, two days before the applicant returned from leave, S.K. dismissed him and paid him the statutory compensation due under Greek law, namely, one month’s salary and EUR 843.41 in respect of holiday leave.
Shortly after his dismissal the applicant found another job in a private company.
On 13 May 2005 the applicant brought proceedings in the Athens Court of First Instance. He complained that “unacceptable social prejudices and outdated taboo considerations” had prevailed over recognition of his contribution to the company where he had worked. He also claimed that he had been unfairly dismissed and that his dismissal was invalid because he had not been paid sufficient compensation. He alleged that he had been dismissed on the basis of “despicable considerations” which took no account of the “human factor or his person”, that his employer “had remained manifestly indifferent to the fact that she had thus seriously harmed a hard-working and conscientious employee at the very time when basic humane considerations required that he be supported and had at the same time callously insulted him”, and that his employer had “treated him with an unjustified and inhumane aversion for his serious health problem”.
The applicant added that the only reason that had led S.K. to dismiss him had been (scientifically unfounded) prejudice against HIV-positive persons and the alleged “risk” that they posed in their professional and social relations. It was therefore clear, in the applicant’s view, that S.K.’s conduct had brutally violated his personality rights, in particular the most intimate ones concerning sensitive personal details. The manner in which he had been dismissed had diminished unacceptably his value as a human being by reducing him to an “object” that could be handled according to “personal prejudices and obsessions”.
The applicant asked the court to declare the termination of the contract unlawful, order the employer to continue employing him and paying him a salary, and to pay him EUR 9,397 in unpaid salaries, EUR 1,068.62 in holiday bonuses and various other amounts calculated by him and, lastly, the sum of EUR 200,000 for non-pecuniary damage.
In a judgment of 13 June 2006 the court held that the dismissal was unlawful, as contrary to Article 281 of the Civil Code which prohibited the exercise of a right if it manifestly exceeded the limits imposed by good faith or morals. The court found that the sole ground for terminating the contract had been the applicant’s illness and awarded him EUR 6,339.18, which corresponded to unpaid salaries since his dismissal. The court considered that the employer’s conduct, even taking account of the pressure exerted by her employees, had constituted an abuse of rights. It found that the employer had decided to dismiss the applicant in order to ensure that her company continued operating smoothly and to avoid protests and complaints, thus currying favour with the majority of her staff.
However, the court rejected the applicant’s complaint that his dismissal had violated his personality rights because it had not been established that the dismissal had been motivated by reprehensible intent or an intention to defame the applicant. The court found, however, that S.K. had dismissed the applicant in order to preserve what she had wrongly believed to be an issue of peaceful working relations within the company. Lastly, the court held that it was not necessary to order the applicant’s reinstatement because he had found a new job in the meantime.
On 26 February and 15 March 2007 respectively, S.K. and the applicant lodged an appeal against that judgment with the Athens Court of Appeal.
In a judgment of 29 January 2008, the Court of Appeal dismissed S.K.’s appeal and upheld the applicant’s appeal on both grounds, namely, abuse of rights and violation of personality rights. Like the Court of First Instance, the Court of Appeal acknowledged that S.K. had dismissed the applicant after giving in to pressure from staff and in order to preserve a good working environment in the company. The Court of Appeal observed that the employees’ fears were scientifically unfounded, as the occupational-health doctor had explained. Given the mode of transmission of the virus, there was no danger to their health. Accordingly, their fears were in reality based on prejudice rather than on an established risk; consequently, the applicant’s illness could not affect the future smooth operation of the company.
The Court of Appeal weighed the need to maintain the smooth operation of the company, which was threatened by scientifically unfounded fears, against the applicant’s justified expectation of being protected during the difficult period he was experiencing. It noted that where an employee’s illness did not adversely affect work relations or the smooth operation of the company (through absenteeism or reduced working capacity, for example), it could not serve as an objective justification for terminating the contract. It noted that the applicant had not been absent from work and that no absence on the ground of illness was foreseeable in the immediate future. Moreover, the nature of the applicant’s job, which did not demand excessive effort, precluded the risk of a reduction in his capacity for work since, during the many years in which a person was merely HIV-positive, his or her working capacity was not substantially reduced.
It observed that the applicant’s illness could not adversely affect the future smooth operation of the company, as none of the employees had left the company between the time when the applicant’s illness had been revealed and the termination of his employment contract. It concluded that the fact that S.K. “had given in to the demands of her employees, dismissed the applicant and terminated his contract could not be justified on grounds of good faith or the employer’s interests within the proper meaning of the term”.
The Court of Appeal awarded the applicant the sum of EUR 6,339.18 in unpaid salaries backdated to the date of his dismissal. It also held that the applicant’s personality rights had been infringed as his unfair dismissal had affected both his professional and social status, which were the two facets of an individual’s personality. It awarded him the further sum of EUR 1,200 for non-pecuniary damage under that head.
On 4 July 2008, S.K. appealed on points of law against the Court of Appeal’s judgment.
On 16 October 2008 the applicant also lodged an appeal against the Court of Appeal’s judgment. He relied on Articles 180 (nullity of a legal act), 281 (abuse of rights) and 932 (compensation for non-pecuniary damage) of the Civil Code, on Article 22 (right to work) of the Constitution, and on the principle of proportionality regarding the amount of the compensation awarded. Relying on the case-law of the Court of Cassation, he also submitted that where a dismissal had been set aside by a judicial decision as unfair, the employer was under an obligation to reinstate the employee. More specifically, in his second ground of appeal, the applicant submitted that the Court of Appeal had wrongly rejected his request to be reinstated in the company, arguing that reinstatement was the rule in the event of a breach of Article 281, or in the event of an infringement of personality rights or of the right to personal development and participation in professional life.
In judgment no. 676/2009 of 17 March 2009 (finalised on 4 June 2009), the Court of Cassation quashed the Court of Appeal’s judgment on the ground, inter alia, that the court had wrongly construed and applied Article 281 of the Civil Code to the facts of the case. It found that termination of an employment contract was not unfair if it was justified by the employer’s interests “in the proper sense of the term”, such as the restoration of peaceful working relations between employees and the smooth operation of the company where these were liable to be disrupted by maintaining the dismissed employee in his or her post. The Court of Cassation held as follows:
“As the dismissal ... was not motivated by ill-will, revenge or any aggressivity on the part of [the employer] towards [the employee], the dismissal was fully justified by the interests of the employer, in the proper sense of the term [interests], in that it was done in order to restore peace in the company and its smooth operation. The employees were seriously perturbed by the extremely serious and contagious illness of the [applicant], which aroused feelings of insecurity among them and fears for their health, prompting them to request – collectively and in writing – his dismissal and stress that if he were not dismissed the smooth operation of the company would be severely affected ...”
Lastly, the Court of Cassation dismissed the applicant’s appeal as devoid of purpose and remitted the case to the Court of Appeal.
Neither the applicant nor his former employer took the initiative reserved to them by statute of applying to the Court of Appeal for a ruling on the case remitted to it.
The relevant Articles of the Greek Constitution provide as follows.
“... An individual’s private and family life is inviolable ...”
“Work constitutes a right and shall enjoy the protection of the State, which shall seek to create conditions of employment for all citizens and shall promote the moral and material advancement of the rural and urban working population. ...”
“The rights of human beings as individuals and members of society and the principle of the constitutional welfare state are guaranteed by the State.
All agents of the State shall be obliged to ensure the unhindered and effective exercise thereof. Where appropriate, these rights shall also apply to the relations between individuals. Restrictions of any kind which, according to the Constitution, may be imposed upon these rights, shall be provided for either directly by the Constitution or by statute ... and shall respect the principle of proportionality.”
Section 1 of Law no. 2112/1920 on dismissal and the termination of employment contracts in the private sector provides:
“A private-sector employee recruited on a contract of indefinite duration who has been employed for more than two months cannot be dismissed without prior written notice of termination of the employment contract ...”
The relevant sections of Law no. 3304/2005 on equal treatment (race, nationality, religion, age, sexual orientation) read as follows.
“The object of the present Law is the adoption of a general regulatory framework in which to combat discrimination based on religion or other beliefs, disability, age or sexual orientation in the sphere of employment ... and to ensure that the principle of equal treatment is applied.”
“1.  Direct or indirect discrimination on one of the grounds referred to in section 1 shall be forbidden.
Harassment ..., with the aim or effect of adversely affecting a person’s dignity and creating an intimidating, hostile, degrading, humiliating or aggressive environment, shall also be regarded as discrimination.”
“In order to comply with the principle of equal treatment of disabled persons, the employer must take all necessary measures required in the circumstances to ensure that disabled persons have access to a workstation, can carry on an activity and develop professionally, and take part in professional training, in so far as such measures do not impose an unreasonable burden on the employer ...”
“1.  It shall not be discriminatory to adopt or maintain special measures designed to prevent or compensate for disadvantages based on religious grounds or other beliefs, or grounds of disability, age or sexual orientation.
It shall not be discriminatory to adopt or maintain measures protecting the health and safety of disabled persons in the workplace or measures creating or maintaining the conditions or facilities for preserving and promoting their integration in the activity and work.”
On 27 January 2011 the National Commission for Human Rights drew up a report on “issues relating to the protection of the rights of HIV-positive persons”. The introduction to the report reads as follows.
“The National Commission for Human Rights has been prompted to examine issues relating to the protection of the rights of HIV-positive persons by the observed lack of enjoyment of fundamental rights by the said individuals, which is exacerbated by stigmatisation, manifestations of intolerance, violations of confidentiality and other forms of social discrimination to their detriment.
The impetus for this was judgment no. 676/2009 of the Court of Cassation, in which that court actually upheld the lawfulness of the dismissal of an HIV-positive employee and endorsed the conditions in which he was dismissed. Having regard to the importance of that decision – which is the first judicial ruling of its kind in the judicial annals of the country – and to the fact that it highlighted a unique but important aspect of the problems facing HIV-positive persons, the Commission organised a consultation with several other organisations and institutions campaigning for the protection of the rights of such persons. A number of issues were raised during the discussion, but the ones considered to be the most important were the following: a) stigmatisation as a result of HIV/Aids, b) discriminatory treatment of persons infected with the virus, particularly in the workplace, c) access by such persons to health services, and d) protection of their private life.”
In its final considerations the Commission observed:
“There is a current and pressing need to protect the rights of HIV-positive persons and to institutionalise and apply the fundamental principles on which these rights are based, having regard to the fact that, according to the latest official statistics, the disease appears to have reached alarming levels in our country.
The risks do not stem only from the disease itself and the fact that it is spreading, but also from the formation and consolidation of dangerous and scientifically unfounded misconceptions through court rulings which maintain that HIV-positive employees constitute a ‘danger’ in their workplace.
Lastly, we should point out that the protection of the rights of HIV-positive persons does not concern them alone but public health in general, in that if these people are not protected they will hesitate to be tested ... which will undermine the efforts being made by public-health organisations to limit the spread of the disease.”
This Recommendation is the first human rights instrument on HIV and Aids in the world of work. It was adopted, by a large majority, by government representatives, employers and workers of the member States of the ILO at the International Labour Conference in June 2010. It provides, inter alia, as follows.
“3.  ...
(c)  [T]here should be no discrimination against or stigmatization of workers, in particular jobseekers and job applicants, on the grounds of real or perceived HIV status or the fact that they belong to regions of the world or segments of the population perceived to be at greater risk of or more vulnerable to HIV infection;
...
Governments, in consultation with the most representative organizations of employers and workers, should consider affording protection equal to that available under the Discrimination (Employment and Occupation) Convention, 1958, to prevent discrimination based on real or perceived HIV status.
Real or perceived HIV status should not be a ground of discrimination preventing the recruitment or continued employment, or the pursuit of equal opportunities consistent with the provisions of the Discrimination (Employment and Occupation) Convention, 1958.
Real or perceived HIV status should not be a cause for termination of employment. Temporary absence from work because of illness or caregiving duties related to HIV or AIDS should be treated in the same way as absences for other health reasons, taking into account the Termination of Employment Convention, 1982.
When existing measures against discrimination in the workplace are inadequate for effective protection against discrimination in relation to HIV and AIDS, Members should adapt these measures or put new ones in place, and provide for their effective and transparent implementation.”
The Parliamentary Assembly of the Council of Europe (PACE) has raised the question of HIV/Aids in a number of documents. In its Recommendation 1116 (1989) on Aids and human rights, it stated the following:
“3.  Noting that, although the Council of Europe has been concerned with prevention ever since 1983, the ethical aspects have been touched upon only cursorily;
Considering nevertheless that it is essential to ensure that human rights and fundamental freedoms are not jeopardised on account of the fear aroused by Aids;
Concerned in particular at the discrimination to which some Aids victims and even seropositive persons are being subjected;
...
Recommends that the Committee of Ministers:
instruct the Steering Committee for Human Rights to give priority to reinforcing the non-discrimination clause in Article 14 of the European Convention on Human Rights, either by adding health to the prohibited grounds of discrimination or by drawing up a general clause on equality of treatment before the law; ...”
In its Resolution 1536 (2007) on HIV/Aids in Europe, PACE reaffirmed its commitment to combating all forms of discrimination against persons living with HIV/Aids:
“9.  While emphasising that the HIV/Aids pandemic is an emergency at the medical, social and economic level, the Assembly calls upon parliaments and governments of the Council of Europe to:
1.  ensure that their laws, policies and practices respect human rights in the context of HIV/Aids, in particular the right to education, work, privacy, protection and access to prevention, treatment, care and support;
2.  protect people living with HIV/Aids from all forms of discrimination in both the public and private sectors ...”
Article 2 § 2 of the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights provides that the rights enunciated in the Covenant “will be exercised without discrimination of any kind as to race, colour, sex, language, religion, political or other opinion, national or social origin, property, birth or other status”. In its General Comment on Non-Discrimination (No. 20, 2009), the United Nations Committee on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights expressly stated that the expression “other status” appearing at the end of Article 2 § 2 of the Covenant included health status, in particular HIV status:
“33.  Health status refers to a person’s physical or mental health. States parties should ensure that a person’s actual or perceived health status is not a barrier to realizing the rights under the Covenant. The protection of public health is often cited by States as a basis for restricting human rights in the context of a person’s health status. However, many such restrictions are discriminatory, for example, when HIV status is used as the basis for differential treatment with regard to access to education, employment, health care, travel, social security, housing and asylum ...”
In the case of Hoffmann v. South African Airways (CCT 17/00) of 28 September 2000, an application had been made to the Constitutional Court against a decision of the Witwatersrand High Court regarding discrimination in the employment of Mr Hoffmann as a cabin attendant for the airline company South African Airways on the ground that he was HIV-positive. The company relied on three arguments: the negative reaction of HIV-positive persons to the yellow fever vaccine; the risk of transmitting diseases to passengers and other members of the company; and the low return on investment in such staff as they had a lower life expectancy than the others.
The Constitutional Court unanimously held that such discrimination had breached Mr Hoffmann’s constitutional rights.
Firstly, it held that a distinction had to be made between HIV-positive persons and persons suffering from immune deficiency. It observed that Mr Hoffmann had been only HIV-positive at the time of his dismissal and the court’s decision. It added that the practice of other foreign airlines had no bearing on an examination of the constitutionality of the decision. Secondly, it recognised that a company’s commercial concerns were legitimate but considered that these should not serve as a pretext for denying elementary fundamental rights such as compassion and tolerance of others. Having regard to those overriding considerations, persons infected with HIV were in a particularly fragile situation which required full protection under the legal system. Accordingly, the court held that the violation of Mr Hoffmann’s rights required the airline to offer him a job forthwith and to bear the costs of the proceedings.
A comparative study of the legislation of thirty member States of the Council of Europe on the protection provided under domestic law to HIV-infected persons from discrimination in the employment context shows that seven States – Albania, Azerbaijan, Italy, the Republic of Moldova, Romania, the United Kingdom and Russia – have passed specific legislation in this respect. In the twenty-three other States, which have not passed specific legislation, HIV-positive persons who face differences in treatment in the workplace can rely on the general provisions of domestic law governing non-discrimination. The decisions of the domestic courts and other bodies for human rights protection in some of these States show that they grant protection against dismissal to HIV-positive persons through the prohibition imposed on other grounds of discrimination, such as health or disability.
In France, for example, on 6 September 2012 the Equal Treatment Commission (the Human Rights Council since October 2012) found that the Law on equal treatment of persons suffering from a disability or chronic illness did not oblige an employee (the case in question concerned the dismissal of an HIV-positive employee of a licensed bar) to disclose his or her illness unless he or she would otherwise be unable to perform the work. The Commission also found that the supposed prejudice of customers towards HIV-positive persons did not justify terminating the contract.
On 13 December 1995 the Pontoise Criminal Court, in France, sentenced an employer to five months’ imprisonment, suspended, and ordered him to pay EUR 3,000 in damages for dismissing – purportedly on economic grounds – one of his employees, a veterinary assistant who was HIV-positive.
Even before the enactment in Belgium of the Law of 10 May 2007 on combating certain forms of discrimination, the Dendermonde Labour Court had held, on 5 January 1998, that an employer had abused his right to terminate an employment contract by dismissing an employee solely on account of his HIV infection.
The Swiss Federal Supreme Court (judgment BGE 127 III 86) held that dismissal from work solely on account of HIV infection was discriminatory and unfair for the purposes of Article 336 of the Code of Obligations.
On 18 October 2004 the Poltava Regional Court, in Ukraine, ordered the editor of a newspaper to pay compensation to a journalist who had been dismissed because he was HIV-positive.
In Croatia, following the intervention of the Ombudsman, the Police Internal Rules, which had previously provided that an HIV-positive person could neither become nor remain a serving police officer, were amended.
On 23 November 2009 the Polish Constitutional Court declared unconstitutional a provision of the Ministry of Interior’s Regulations according to which any police officer who was HIV-positive should automatically be declared unfit for service.
On 26 April 2011 the Russian Supreme Court declared inoperative a provision of the Civil Aviation Regulations forbidding HIV-positive persons from working as pilots on any type of aircraft.