The case originated in an application (no. 23065/12) against the Republic of Turkey lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Turkish national, Mr Enver Şahin (“the applicant”), on 14 March 2012.
The applicant was represented by Mr S. Elban, Mr H.K. Elban and Mr F. Erbek, lawyers practising in Antalya. The Turkish Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent.
The applicant alleged that he had been the victim of discriminatory interference with his right to respect of private life (Article 8 of the Convention read in conjunction with Article 14), and complained of a discriminatory infringement of his right to education (Article 2 of Protocol No. 1 read in conjunction with Article 14 of the Convention).
On 5 March 2014 notice of the application was given to the Government.
The applicant was born in 1988 and lives in Diyarbakır.
In 2005, while he was a first-year mechanics student in the technical faculty of Fırat University (“the faculty”), the applicant was seriously injured in an accident which left his lower limbs paralysed. He had to suspend his studies until he had recovered sufficiently to return to university.
On 17 March 2007 the applicant requested the faculty to adapt the university premises in order to enable him to resume his studies for the 20072008 academic year.
The faculty replied to that request by letter of 25 May 2007. It pointed out that the faculty building had been designed and built with several floors in order to accommodate 3,000 students and that its architecture could not be adapted. It stated that the administration had been asked for leave to conduct redevelopment work on the doors to the building, but that that work could not be carried out in the short term. It added that the mechanics course required the applicant to participate in practical workshops, considering that as things stood such participation would cause problems. The faculty concluded that if the applicant wished to continue his studies it would help him as far as possible.
On 16 August 2007 the applicant sent, through a notary, formal notice to the administration of Fırat University and the faculty dean inviting them to carry out the redevelopment work requested. Relying on Article 42 of the Constitution, section 15 of Law no. 5378 on persons with disabilities and Article 2 of Protocol No. 1 to the Convention, he affirmed that it was the State’s duty to guarantee the citizens’ right to education, in line with the principle of equal opportunities. He further alleged that the faculty’s reply to his request (see paragraph 8 above) had been intended solely to induce him to abandon his studies.
The administration replied to that formal notice by letter of 10 September 2007. The latter stated that the redevelopment works mentioned should be considered in the light of compliance with the regulations on public property, which could take some time. Furthermore, any problems encountered by the applicant in attending the theoretical classes administered in a three-storey building could be resolved with the help of a companion.
The Administration pointed out that the practical workshops were held on the ground floor of the building and posed no problems with regard to access, and that the applicant would consequently have no difficulty in attending the courses administered in the framework of those workshops. It explained that the only reason why the applicant’s participation in the practical workshops had previously been described as problematic (see paragraph 8 above) was that such workshops necessitated a considerable physical effort and that his particular situation required some thought regarding the type of assistance with which he could be provided. Furthermore, all the parties involved were anxious to help students in difficulty, and there was no question of deterring the applicant from continuing his studies. Finally, the Administration pointed out that since, in its view, the budget allocated by the State was limited, the redevelopment work necessitated by the applicant’s situation was subject to unavoidable budgetary and time constraints.
On 15 November 2007 the applicant filed with the Elazığ Administrative Court an action for annulment of the university’s replies of 25 May and 10 September 2007 and to provide compensation for the pecuniary and non-pecuniary damage which he claimed he had sustained. He complained that the authorities had not removed the physical obstacles preventing him from exercising his right to education. He claimed 25,000 Turkish liras (TRY) in respect of non-pecuniary damage and TRY 30,000 in respect of pecuniary damage.
The Administration of Fırat University replied in a defence memorial of 24 March 2008. That document stated that the university had not been responsible for the applicant’s accident. It criticised the applicant for having opted for judicial channels, and alleged that he was acting in bad faith, adding, in that connection, that he had been informed that he would be provided with support should he decide to return to university. Furthermore, the relevant agencies had been contacted with a view to redeveloping the faculty building and a proposal had been made to include the works in an investment programme complying with the relevant regulations governing public property. The Administration further argued that it had offered the applicant the services of an assistant, but that he had not submitted any request for such help. The office added that access to the workshops posed no problems for persons with disabilities, but that the courses administered at the workshops demanded a physical effort from participants. Lastly, it pointed out that the applicant had never been barred from any course.
The applicant replied, refuting the arguments put forward by the Administration. He submitted that his right to education was guaranteed by domestic law and by Article 2 of Protocol No. 1 to the Convention, and that it was incumbent on the domestic authorities to take steps to enable him to exercise that right, with respect for the principle of equal opportunities. Moreover, he argued that the redevelopment work requested was such as should already have been conducted in any case, in line with the requirements of section 1bis of Law no. 3194 on urban planning (see paragraph 23 above). Furthermore, he considered that the authorities’ offer of an assistant illustrated their ignorance of his personal situation and the implications of that situation. He added that it would be degrading for him to be placed in a situation of dependence on a third person because of his disability, citing the example of how the constant presence and assistance of a third person would invade his privacy. He also pointed out that the fact of being carried upstairs by another individual comprised a definite risk of his falling.
On 13 October 2008 the faculty terminated its contracts with a number of students, including the applicant, on the grounds that they had not re-registered at the start of two successive academic years.
2 November 2009 saw the enactment of Legislative Decree no. 2009/15546, published in the Official Gazette (“the OG”) on 13 November 2009, closing down certain categories of institutions of higher education, including technical faculties, one of which was the technical faculty of Fırat University, which was replaced by a new faculty of technology. Under the legislative decree students who were already registered could continue their studies in the new faculties.
On 9 April 2010 the Elazığ Administrative Court dismissed the applicant’s appeal. In the reasoning of its judgment it stated, in particular, that the buildings in question had been erected in accordance with the regulations in force in 1988. The court took the view that although it was incumbent on the authorities to apply the technical guidelines set out in the legislation subsequently enacted for persons with disabilities, it could not be contended that the respondent authority had not followed those guidelines during the construction of a building erected in 1988, before the guidelines had come into force. Lastly, the judgment mentioned that the authorities had informed the complainant that architectural measures would be adopted, depending on the available budget, and that a person would be appointed to assist him in attending the courses.
The applicant lodged an appeal on points of law with the Supreme Administrative Court against that judgment.
On 18 January 2011 the Supreme Administrative Court delivered a judgment dismissing that appeal on points of law and upholding the first-instance judgment as being in conformity with the procedure and laws.
The applicant lodged an application for rectification of that judgment with the Supreme Administrative Court, complaining of an infringement of his right to education and the equality principle.
On 28 September 2011 the Supreme Administrative Court dismissed the applicant’s application, holding that there were no grounds for rectification.
The domestic law relevant to the present case was partly described in the judgment Çam v. Turkey (no. 51500/08, §§ 34-36, 23 February 2016).
Furthermore, section 3 (f) of Law no. 5378 on persons with disabilities of 1 July 2005 (“Law no. 5378”), published in the OG on 7 July 2005, defines accessibility as follows:
Article 2 (provisional) of that Law as in force at the material time read as follows:
On 30 May 1997 an additional section was added to Law no. 3194 on Urban Planning of 3 May 1985, published in the OG on 9 May 1985. That section provides for an obligation to comply with the standards of the Turkish Standards Institute in urban planning projects, in urban and social construction areas and in technical infrastructures in order to ensure that the physical environment is accessible and adapted to persons with disabilities.
Law no. 6111 of 13 February 2011, published in the OG on 25 February 2011, added section 58 (provisional) to Law no. 2547 on Higher Education of 4 November 1981 (the so-called “student amnesty law”), published in the OG on 6 November 1981. That section provides, in particular, that certain students who, before the entry into force of the section, had terminated their relations with their institutions of higher education can:
–  resume their studies during the 20112012 academic year, subject to applying to do so within five months of the entry into force of the said section;
–  begin attending courses at the spring term of the 20102011 academic year, subject to applying to do so within ten days of the entry into force of that section and provided that that application is accepted by the institution in question.
Section 11 of Law no. 6353 of 4 July 2012, published in the OG on 12 July 2012, added section 63 (provisional) to Law no. 2547, providing as follows:
“Anyone who is ineligible under section 58 (provisional) [of Law no. 2547] because he or she has failed to lodge an application within the prescribed time-limit ... may, as from the entry into force of that section, begin [a course of study] during the subsequent [academic] year pursuant to the principles set out in section 58 (provisional), by applying to the institution of higher education with which they have broken off relations.”
The texts of international law relevant to the instant case are described in the Çam judgment (cited above, §§ 37-38 – see, additionally, Zehnalová and Zehnal v. the Czech Republic (dec.), no. 38621/97, ECHR 2002V; Mółka v. Poland (dec.), no56550/00, ECHR 2006-IV; and Farcaş v. Romania (dec.), no. 2596/04, §§ §§ 68-70, 14 September 2010).
Regard should also be had to the following passages from the United Nations Convention on the Rights of People with Disabilities (“CRPD”), adopted on 13 December 2006 by the United Nations General Assembly and signed on 30 March 2007, and then ratified by Turkey on 28 September 2009.
“Definitions
For the purposes of the present Convention:
...
‘Discrimination on the basis of disability’ means any distinction, exclusion or restriction on the basis of disability which has the purpose or effect of impairing or nullifying the recognition, enjoyment or exercise, on an equal basis with others, of all human rights and fundamental freedoms in the political, economic, social, cultural, civil or any other field. It includes all forms of discrimination, including denial of reasonable accommodation;
‘Reasonable accommodation’ means necessary and appropriate modification and adjustments not imposing a disproportionate or undue burden, where needed in a particular case, to ensure to persons with disabilities the enjoyment or exercise on an equal basis with others of all human rights and fundamental freedoms
 ...”
“Education
States Parties recognize the right of persons with disabilities to education. With a view to realizing this right without discrimination and on the basis of equal opportunity, States Parties shall ensure an inclusive education system at all levels and lifelong learning directed to:
(a) The full development of human potential and sense of dignity and self-worth, and the strengthening of respect for human rights, fundamental freedoms and human diversity;
...
States Parties shall ensure that persons with disabilities are able to access general tertiary education, vocational training, adult education and lifelong learning without discrimination and on an equal basis with others. To this end, States Parties shall ensure that reasonable accommodation is provided to persons with disabilities
...”
Reference should also be made to Article 13 of the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights, adopted by the United Nations on 19 December 1966 and ratified by Turkey on 23 September 2003. That provision lays down that the States Parties must recognise the right of everyone to education and, with a view to achieving the full realisation of that right, that higher education must be made equally accessible to all, on the basis of capacity, by every appropriate means.
Within the Council of Europe, Recommendation No. R (98) 3 on access to higher education, adopted on 17 March 1998 by the Committee des Ministers, acknowledges that higher education has a key role to play in the promotion of human rights and fundamental freedoms.
Furthermore, in its Recommendation No. R (92) 6 of 9 April 1992 on a coherent policy for persons with disabilities, the Committee of Ministers invited member States to “guarantee the right of people with disabilities to an independent life and full integration into society” and to “recognise society’s duty to make this possible”, in order to give persons with disabilities proper “equality of opportunity” with others. Public authority action must be geared, inter alia, to give persons with disabilities “as much mobility as possible, and access to buildings and means of transport”, and to enable them to “play a full role in society” and “take part in economic, social, leisure, recreational and cultural activities”.
For its part, the Parliamentary Assembly of the Council of Europe dealt with these matters in its Recommendation No. 1185 (1992) of 7 May 1992 on rehabilitation policies for the disabled. That text emphasised that “society has a duty to adapt its standards to the specific needs of disabled people in order to ensure that they can lead independent lives”. To that end, Governments and the competent authorities were called upon to “strive for and encourage genuine active participation by disabled people in ... the community and society” and accordingly, to guarantee “ease of access to buildings”.