The case originated in an application (no. 75947/11) against the Russian Federation lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by eleven Russian nationals (for personal details see Appendix).
The applicants were represented by Ms K. Moskalenko and Ms Ye. Napara, lawyers practising in Russia. The Russian Government (“the Government”) were represented by Mr G. Matyushkin, Representative of the Russian Federation to the European Court of Human Rights.
The applicants alleged that the organisation and conduct of the election process in several polling stations in St Petersburg in December 2011 did not comply with the requirements of Article 3 of Protocol No. 1 to the Convention and that they had had no effective domestic remedies against the violations alleged.
On 18 March 2014 the application was communicated to the Government.
The facts of the case, as submitted by the applicants, may be summarised as follows.
All the applicants are Russian nationals living in St Petersburg. On 4 December 2011 they took part in elections which, on that date, took place simultaneously at city level and federal level: the election of deputies to the Legislative Assembly of St Petersburg (the legislative body of the City of St Petersburg, a constituent entity of the Russian Federation, hereinafter referred to as “the LA”) and the election of deputies to the State Duma of the Russian Federation (the lower chamber of the Russian parliament, hereinafter referred to as “the Duma”).
The applicants participated in the elections in different capacities: all of them were registered voters; in addition, some of them stood as candidates for the LA, while others were members of electoral commissions or observers.
The applicants alleged that the electoral commissions had falsified the results of the elections by systematically assigning more votes to the ruling Yedinaya Rossiya (ER) party and its candidates, and stripping the opposition parties and candidates of their votes. The allegations raised by the first to seventh applicants concern the results of voting in the Kolpino district of St Petersburg (electoral divisions (избирательный округ) nos. 18 and 19 of St Petersburg). Other applicants complained about the results in other electoral divisions in St Petersburg (see Appendix).
After the announcement of the preliminary election results, some applicants complained to the St Petersburg City Electoral Commission alleging falsification of the results. Some of the applicants lodged criminal complaints and sued the respective electoral commissions in courts. For more details about their contesting the results of the elections, see sections D to H below.
Elections at both levels (federal and city) were based on proportional representation by party list. That is, the electorate voted not for individual candidates but for lists of candidates proposed by political parties. The following parties took part in the elections:
Yedinaya Rossiya (“ER”);
Spraverdlivaya Rossiya (“SR”);
Patrioty Rossii (“PR”);
Pravoye Delo (“PD”);
Kommunisticheskaya Partiya Rossiyskoy Federatsii (“the KPRF”);
Liberalno-Demokraticheskaya Partiya Rossii (“the LDPR”);
Yabloko.
ER was the ruling party which already had an absolute majority in both legislatures. The other parties could be characterised as “opposition”, albeit to varying extents.
The number of seats each party could obtain in the LA and in the Duma depended on the number of votes received. The chances for each individual candidate of being elected depended on what position he or she occupied on the list of his or her respective party. Those at the top had a higher chance of being elected. Even if a party obtained the number of votes required to pass the “minimum threshold” established by law to enter the LA or the Duma, a poor overall result for that party would deprive those in lower positions on the list of a mandate. Thus, the chances for each individual candidate of being elected depended not on the results of the voting at a particular polling station, but on the average result of his or her political party in general, throughout the whole territory concerned.
Vote counting at the 2011 elections was organised at three levels. Voters cast their votes at the polling stations managed by the Precinct Electoral Commissions (участковая избирательная комиссия (УИК) – hereinafter “the PECs”). The PECs also collected the votes of those casting their votes at home. Each precinct usually had between 2,000 and 3,000 registered voters. Generally, the lists of voters registered for federal and city elections were identical, and each voter coming to the polling station received two separate ballot papers – one for the LA elections and another for the Duma elections.
On election night the PECs, after opening the ballot boxes (stationary and mobile), counted the votes and drew up results sheets (referred to as “protocols”). Separate protocols were drawn up for the LA and Duma elections. All members of the electoral commissions had to sign the protocols and were entitled to receive a copy of them (see paragraphs 178179 below for the formal requirements to copies of protocols).
After that, one copy of the protocol was brought to the relevant Territorial Electoral Commission (территориальная избирательная комиссия (ТИК) – hereinafter “the TECs”), which was responsible for preparing a consolidated table of results of the voting in the divisions under its jurisdiction. Each TEC covered several electoral divisions (избирательные округа, sometimes also called территории (“territories”)); and each division covered several dozen precincts. To give examples relevant to the applicants’ complaints, TEC no. 3 covered electoral division no. 17 (comprised of thirty-two precincts), TEC no. 7 covered electoral division no. 15 (comprised of thirty-three precincts), TEC no. 21 covered electoral divisions nos. 18 (thirty-two precincts) and 19 (thirty-four precincts) and TEC no. 27 covered electoral division no. 33 (forty precincts).
Each TEC then sent their own protocols to the St Petersburg City Electoral Commission (Санкт-Петербургская избирательная комиссия) (hereinafter “the City Electoral Commission”), which made a final calculation at the City level. The results were published on the website of the City Electoral Commission. The overall system of elections in Russia was supervised by the Central Electoral Commission (Центральная избирательная комиссия (ЦИК)) (hereinafter “the CEC”).
The applicants complain of various kinds of manipulation during the elections. They all allege that the protocols containing the results in the precincts were replaced with new ones at the territorial commissions. These new protocols contained different figures, inflating the results for ER and diminishing the results for other parties, notably SR and Yabloko.
Mr Davydov (the first applicant) was born in 1987 in Leningrad. He stood as a candidate for the LA for the SR party. His complaint concerns the results of elections to the LA in the Kolpino district of St Petersburg (electoral division no. 19).
In Mr Davydov’s submission, the results of the elections as published on 5 December 2011 by the City Electoral Commission on its website did not correspond to the real figures obtained by the PECs as a result of the vote counting which had taken place on the evening of 4 December 2011. The official election results at city level (including Kolpino district) were approved by a decision of the City Electoral Commission on 12 December 2011.
In support of his allegation the applicant produced copies of the allegedly original protocols drawn up by PECs. The applicant, as a candidate and a member of SR, had collected those protocols from the members of the electoral commissions who represented SR or other opposition parties, as well as from the observers who had been dispatched to the polling stations by SR, the KPRF and Yabloko. Under the law, after the votes had been counted, members of the electoral commissions and observers were entitled to receive a “certified copy” of the protocol. The applicant also produced a list of the names of observers and members of the electoral commissions who had given him copies of the protocols.
Mr Davydov produced information concerning thirty-five precincts, all belonging to electoral division no. 19. He produced copies of the “original protocols” and of the “final results” published on the website of the City Electoral Commission. Some of the final results are identical to those in the “original” protocols. For example, the “original” protocol issued by PEC no. 640 contained results which were identical to the official final results.
However, in the majority of the polling stations the number of votes cast in favour of ER was much lower than the figure which appeared in the official results. Polling station no. 639 could be taken as an example. According to the applicant’s copy of the protocol issued by PEC no. 639, 903 valid ballot papers were cast. The votes were distributed as follows:
According to the final results published by the City Electoral Commission, the same 903 valid ballot papers were distributed as follows:
In the applicant’s opinion, the difference between the published results and the “original” protocols showed that the votes had been redistributed in favour of ER and, to a certain extent, the LDPR.
The applicant submitted “original” protocols in respect of the following twenty-one precincts where the results of ER, recorded in the original tables, were lower than the results officially published by the City Electoral Commission: nos. 638, 639, 641, 642, 643, 644, 646, 648, 649, 651, 652, 653, 654, 657, 661, 662, 664, 665, 666, 667 and 668. From the documents submitted by the applicant it appears that the form of the “original” reports differs from one PEC to another. All the “original” reports contained certain pre-printed parts to be filled in; however, not all of the information fields were filled in and not all signatures were always in place. Thus, some of the reports submitted by the applicant did not have a third page, which should contain the signatures of the members of the electoral commissions (for example, precinct no. 638). Some of the reports contained a third page with the signatures of the head of the relevant PEC and/or his or her deputy, but not the signatures of the other members, and did not contain the official stamp or indicate the time when they had been drawn up (for example, no. 639). Some reports had no third page, but the first page bore the words “authentic copy”, the signature of the head of the electoral commission and an official stamp (for example, no. 642).
A number of the “original” protocols had all the necessary entries and signatures, indicated the date and time they had been drawn up, and bore an official stamp on the third page (for example, station no. 654, which reported that ER had received 261 votes whereas the official final results reported 748; the protocols from precincts nos. 657, 661, 665 and others show a similar pattern) or even on every page (for example, station no. 643, which listed ER as having obtained 253 votes, in contrast to the 498 votes it received according to the final results).
Generally speaking, most of the “original” protocols are photocopies containing the handwritten inscription “authentic copy”, the PEC stamp and the handwritten signature of the head of the commission, his or deputy and, occasionally, the secretary.
According to the “original” protocols presented by the first applicant, in division no. 19 ER received 8,695 votes, whereas the City Electoral Commission reported a figure which was almost twice as high: 17,265 votes. The same “original” copies indicated that SR had obtained 10,031 votes, while the official result was only 4,538 votes. Votes for other parties (except for the LDPR) had also been redistributed in favour of ER.
The second applicant (Ms Andronova) was born in 1953 in Leningrad. Her complaint concerned the right to vote in both the LA and the State Duma elections. She was a voter registered in electoral precinct no. 652 in Kolpino (electoral division no. 19). She was also a voting member of PEC no. 652. She was affiliated to SR. She voted for SR at both levels and monitored both elections – to the City LA and to the State Duma – at that polling station.
The initial result achieved by SR in the LA elections in precinct no. 652, as reflected in the copy of the protocol which the second applicant received as a PEC member, was 299 votes; the official result was 19 votes. As to the Duma elections, SR received 315 votes according to the initial count and 115 votes according to the official results.
Other parties also saw their votes redistributed in favour of ER. Thus, according to the protocols, the KPRF obtained 174 votes in the Duma elections and 164 in the LA elections; however, the City Electoral Commission reported 74 and 14 votes respectively. The official results of ER at that polling station were 574 in the Duma elections, while the initial figure stood at 274; and 599 votes in the LA elections, compared to 259 according to the initial protocols.
The third applicant (Mr Andronov) was born in 1986 in Leningrad. His complaint concerned the right to vote in both the LA and the State Duma elections. He was a voter registered in electoral precinct no. 651 in Kolpino (electoral division no. 19), and was a voting member of the same PEC. He was affiliated to SR. The official results of SR at that station were 125 votes (Duma elections) and nine votes (LA elections), whereas according to the “original” protocols, SR received 345 and 328 votes respectively. The official results achieved by ER were 640 (Duma) and 807 (LA), compared to the initially recorded 310 (Duma) and 299 (LA).
The fourth applicant (Ms Nikolayeva) was born in 1988 in Leningrad. Her complaint concerned the right to vote in both the LA and the State Duma elections. She was a voter registered in electoral precinct no. 654 in Kolpino (electoral division no. 19), and was a voting member of the same PEC. She was affiliated to SR. In that precinct in the Duma elections SR received 307 votes according to the “original” protocol and 157 according to the official published results; and 287 and 14 respectively in the LA elections. The official results of ER were 748 (LA) and 424 (Duma), compared to initial results of 261 (LA) and 274 (Duma).
The fifth applicant (Mr Sizenov) was born in 1972 in Leningrad. His complaint concerned the right to vote in both the LA and the State Duma elections. He was a voter registered in electoral precinct no. 661 in Kolpino (electoral division no. 19) and was a voting member of the same PEC. He was affiliated to Yabloko. In that precinct in the Duma elections Yabloko received 90 votes originally and 40 votes officially, and in the LA elections 103 and 8 votes respectively. In the same vein, SR received 358 votes according to the “original” protocols and 138 according to the official results in the Duma elections, and 360 and 13 respectively in the LA elections. The official results of ER were 667 (Duma) and 861 (LA), with 296 (Duma) and 281 (LA) being recorded initially.
The sixth applicant (Mr Belyakov) was born in 1948 in Leningrad. He was a voter registered in electoral precinct no. 637 in Kolpino (electoral division no. 18); his complaint only concerned the elections to the LA. According to him, as a result of the redistribution of votes, the result achieved by ER had increased from 380 to 804 votes, to the detriment of other parties. The sixth applicant had received the relevant protocols from Mr M., who was the head of the local branch of the KPRF and had received the protocols from the KPRF observer at that polling station.
The seventh applicant (Mr Yakushenko) was born in 1954 in the Leningrad Region. He was a voter registered in electoral precinct no. 623 in Kolpino (electoral division no. 18); his complaint concerned the elections to the LA. According to him, as a result of the redistribution of votes, ER’s result had increased from 731 to 798 votes, to the detriment of other parties. The seventh applicant also received the protocols from Mr M.
The eighth applicant (Mr Payalin) was born in 1968 in Leningrad. He stood as a candidate in the elections to the LA for SR. His complaint concerned the results in electoral division no. 22 of St Petersburg in the elections to the LA. In particular, he challenged the official figures for twenty-two electoral precincts (nos. 721, 722, 723, 724, 725, 726, 727, 728, 729, 731, 733, 734, 735, 736, 739, 740, 741, 742, 743, 744, 745 and 794). According to the initial calculation, in electoral division no. 22 SR had obtained 9,616 votes, whereas the official result stood at 6,415. He claimed that as a result of the falsification of the results SR had been deprived of a number of seats in the LA and he had not been elected.
The seventh and eighth applicants later withdrew their complaints to the Court (see paragraphs 202 and 203 below).
The ninth applicant (Mr Truskanov) was born in 1946 in Leningrad. He stood as a candidate in the elections to the LA for SR. His complaint concerned the results of the elections to the LA in electoral division no. 17 of St Petersburg. In particular, he challenged the official figures concerning the results in ten electoral precincts (nos. 486, 489, 495, 496, 497, 498, 500, 501, 508 and 509). According to the applicant’s calculations based on the initial protocols collected by him and by several other political parties concerned, in this electoral division SR had obtained 7,530 votes, while the official result indicated 5,765 votes. At the same time, ER’s results had changed from 5,677 to 12,598 votes.
The ninth applicant’s complaint has another limb. He claimed that in division no. 17 two “closed” electoral precincts, nos. 1852 and 1853, had been set up at a site with special security status – a heavy machinery plant. Observers, candidates and media were not allowed to access those “closed” precincts; ER’s results in those precincts were particularly high, if compared with other precincts where observers and candidates had been able to monitor the process of voting and counting.
The tenth applicant (Ms Pushkareva) was born in 1957 in the Donetsk Region. She stood as a candidate in the elections to the LA for SR. Her complaint concerned the results of the elections to the LA in electoral division no. 33 of St Petersburg. In particular, she challenged the official figures concerning the results in 18 electoral precincts (nos. 1070, 1084, 1089, 1090, 1093, 1097, 1098, 1103, 1104, 1107, 1108, 1109, 1111, 1114, 1115, 1118, 1126 and 1127). Thus, according to the initial protocols obtained by the applicant as a candidate in this circuit, SR had obtained 9,794 votes, whereas the official result was announced as 7,131.
Furthermore, the tenth applicant indicated that the official results in electoral precincts nos. 1071, 1091, 1099 and 1113 had been declared void by the higher electoral commission. On 5 December 2011 TEC no. 27 decided, first, to conduct an independent recount in the four precincts owing to “complaints of breaches of the law and doubts about the correctness of the protocols”. The TEC then decided as follows:
No new election had been organised, and as a result voters living in those four precincts had been deprived of their right to vote, and the applicant’s party (SR) had been deprived of a number of votes.
The eleventh applicant (Mr Shestakov) was born in 1982 in Leningrad. He stood as a candidate in the elections to the LA for SR. His complaint concerned the results in electoral division no. 15 of St Petersburg, only in respect of the elections to the LA. In particular, he challenged the official figures concerning the results in thirteen electoral precincts (nos. 554, 555, 557, 592, 593, 597, 598, 600, 601, 605, 606, 610 and 611). According to the initial copies of the protocols collected by the applicant from the observers and PEC members, SR had obtained 6,629 votes in this electoral division; the official result stood at 3,894 votes.
In addition, the eleventh applicant also contested data appearing in some of the “original” protocols. In particular, he claimed that the protocols from sixteen PECs (nos. 549, 552, 553, 554, 444, 446, 558, 592, 594, 598, 601, 605, 606, 607, 608 and 611) did not reflect the actual results.
He referred to the following breaches of procedure which had been reported by observers and some members of electoral commissions and which were, in his opinion, indicative of manipulation:
The observers had referred to other problems and anomalies in the voting and counting process (insufficient number of blank ballot papers, lists of registered voters not stapled together and sealed, inexplicable interruptions to the process of counting the votes, third parties entering the premises of the City Electoral Commission and talking to the head of the commission, agitation for ER, and so on).
To confirm his allegations the eleventh applicant submitted copies of complaints lodged by individual observers and members of the electoral commissions at the electoral precincts concerned.
On 6 December 2011 the third and fourth applicants (Mr Andronov and Ms Nikolayeva) lodged an administrative complaint with the City Electoral Commission indicating that the official results of the voting (in LA and Duma elections) in precincts nos. 651 and 654 of Kolpino district were wrong and did not correspond to those recorded in the protocols.
As regards polling station no. 651, the third applicant (Mr Andronov) described the process of transporting the protocols to TEC no. 21. He indicated that the protocols had been taken by the PEC chairman to the TEC on 5 December 2011. However, when Mr Andronov had spoken to the chairman on the telephone at about 7.15 p.m., the latter had informed him that the document had not yet been handed to the TEC and that he was waiting in the corridor to be called. Nevertheless, by that time information about precinct no. 651 had already appeared on the website of the City Electoral Commission. In other words, the City Electoral Commission had published the precinct results before TEC no. 21 had received the protocols from the chairman of the precinct commission. The figures published by the City Electoral Commission were different from the result recorded in the “original” protocol, with a higher number of votes for ER. The PEC chairman had later informed Mr Andronov that he had handed in the protocols and had been given a receipt by the TEC; according to the third applicant, the receipt contained the original results, and not those which had been published later. A copy of that receipt had later been added to the file before the TEC. The third applicant had recorded all his conversations with the PEC chairman and submitted a CD with those recordings. He also indicated that he would be prepared to request a printout of his telephone call history during the period concerned from the mobile operator.
As regards polling station no. 654, the fourth applicant (Ms Nikolayeva) gave fewer details about the process of transporting the protocols and the tabulation of results at the TEC; she simply indicated that as a voting member of the precinct commission she had received a copy of the protocols, and that this copy did not correspond to the official results published by the City Electoral Commission.
On 8 December 2011 the City Electoral Commission forwarded the third applicant’s complaint to the Kolpino District Prosecutor for further action. It appears that the fourth applicant’s complaint was also sent there.
On 12 December 2011 the City Electoral Commission officially approved the results of the elections in St Petersburg, including precincts nos. 651 and 654.
On 19 December 2011 the Kolpino District Prosecutor informed the third applicant that as the election results had been officially approved the complaint had to be lodged with the courts.
On 28 December 2011 the City Electoral Commission informed the third applicant, by letter, that after the official approval of the election results, the results could only be contested in court. The fourth applicant did not receive any reply to her complaint.
On 2 and 8 February 2012 the third and fourth applicants lodged complaints with the Oktyabrskiy District Court, challenging the refusal of the City Electoral Commission to examine their complaints.
On 9 and 15 February 2012 the Oktyabrskiy District Court rejected the applicants’ complaints. The relevant part of the court’s reasoning in both decisions reads as follows:
The two applicants appealed; on 16 April and 10 May 2012 the St Petersburg City Court upheld the lower court’s decisions.
The second applicant (Ms Andronova) also complained to the City Electoral Commission about a discrepancy between the numbers of votes recorded by her at PEC no. 652 and those announced by the City Electoral Commission. On 9 December 2011 the City Electoral Commission informed her that her complaint had been forwarded to the St Petersburg City Prosecutor.
The second applicant also applied to the Oktyabrskiy District Court, contesting the City Electoral Commission’s refusal to examine her complaint. On 5 March 2012 her complaint was dismissed, on similar grounds (see paragraph 56 above). The St Petersburg City Court upheld the decision on appeal on 2 May 2012.
On 20 December 2011 the Kolpino District Prosecutor received a complaint alleging falsification of the results in precinct no. 646 (as challenged by the first applicant – see paragraphs 18 et seq. above).
On 18 January 2012 the Kolpino District Prosecutor decided not to open an investigation into this allegation. The investigator noted that, indeed, according to the “original” protocols produced by the unnamed claimant, the number of votes received by ER had been only one-third of the total officially reported. However, the investigator had received another protocol from the City Electoral Commission, in which the number of votes recorded was identical to that reported on the website. Having examined it, the investigator continued as follows:
It appears that at some point the decision of 18 January 2012 was quashed by a supervising prosecutor. On 21 February 2012 the same investigator again decided not to open a case. The new decision by the investigator read as follows:
According to the applicants, in the following months that decision by the investigator was set aside and the case was reopened and then closed again at least once. The applicants did not have any more detailed information about all the reopenings and closures of the case.
On 5 December 2011 the second applicant (Ms Andronova) lodged a complaint with the St Petersburg Department of the Investigative Committee. She wrote that, as a voting member of PEC no. 652, she had seen the results of the election and had participated in the transfer of the signed protocol to TEC no. 21. In a telephone conversation the head of the TEC had confirmed that he had received the protocol. According to that document, SR had received 315 votes; however, the official results reported 115 votes. The second applicant attached a copy of the “original” protocol and the final results as published on the website of the City Electoral Commission, and asked the Investigative Committee to open a criminal investigation into the matter. In her opinion, the circumstances of the case were indicative of falsification of the results of the elections – a crime under the Criminal Code of the Russian Federation (see paragraphs 29 et seq. above).
It appears that the second applicant’s complaint was forwarded to the Kolpino District Prosecutor’s Office for consideration.
On 14 February 2012 the Kolpino District Prosecutor informed the second applicant that he had decided not to take any action in connection with her complaint. The prosecutor informed the second applicant, without giving any specific details or answering the allegations raised in the complaint, that having considered the situation, he had not detected any breaches of electoral law. She was entitled to challenge the official results of the elections before a court that had jurisdiction over the relevant electoral commissions.
On 6 December 2011 the third and fourth applicants lodged a complaint with the St Petersburg Department of the Investigative Committee, seeking the opening of a criminal investigation into the alleged falsification of the results of the elections in precincts nos. 651 and 654 (see paragraphs 32 and 33 above). The third applicant referred, in particular, to the conversation he had had with the chairman of PEC no. 651, and insisted that the results of the elections in that precinct had been published before the relevant protocols had been transported to TEC no. 21 (see paragraph 49 above). He also attached a transcript of that conversation. This complaint was forwarded to the Kolpino District Prosecutor.
On 18 January 2012 a decision was taken not to open a criminal investigation. Documents submitted after the present case was communicated indicate that on 23 January 2012 the decision of 18 January 2012 was set aside by the Kolpino District Prosecutor.
On 14 February 2012 the Kolpino District Prosecutor informed the third applicant that he had decided to take no action in respect of the complaint for want of any breach of legislation (in a letter identical to the letter of the same date sent to the second applicant – see paragraph 66 above). On the same day the Kolpino District Prosecutor informed the fourth applicant that her complaint was being examined.
On 12 June 2012 an investigator of the Kolpino District Investigative Committee ruled that a criminal investigation was not to be opened into allegations of fraud in precinct no. 654 in view of the absence of evidence of a crime (he referred to another claimant, not the fourth applicant). The decision was based principally on the Kolpino District Court judgment of 22 March 2012, which confirmed the results of elections in Kolpino, including in precinct no. 654 (see paragraph 143 below). The investigator, in line with the judgment of 22 March 2012, found that what the claimant had presented as a “copy of the PEC original protocol” did not constitute valid evidence, as it was incompatible with the requirements of the St Petersburg Elections Act. Thus, the recount ordered and conducted by TEC no. 21 had been lawful and the results of this recount were correctly reflected on the City Electoral Commission’s website.
The sixth applicant (Mr Belyakov) lodged a complaint with the Investigative Committee concerning falsification of the results in precinct no. 637 (see paragraph 35 above). The Investigative Committee forwarded it to the City Electoral Commission. On 30 December 2011 the City Electoral Commission informed the sixth applicant that after official approval of the results, any complaint should be lodged with a court.
On 10 January 2012 the Kolpino District Court found that forwarding the applicant’s criminal-law complaint to the City Electoral Commission had been unlawful. However, the court did not indicate what sort of action should have been taken by the Investigative Committee in response to the applicant’s complaint.
The documents submitted by the parties indicate that two other individuals who had acted as observers in PECs nos. 644 and 648 lodged similar complaints in December 2011. At some point these complaints were joined to the sixth applicant’s complaint concerning falsification of the voting results in precinct no. 637.
On 21 May 2013 an investigator of the Kolpino District Department of the Investigative Committee ruled that a criminal investigation was not to be opened, in view of the absence of evidence of a crime. This decision covered complaints lodged by various individuals about precincts nos. 637, 644, 648 and 651. He referred, principally, to the Kolpino District Court judgments of 22 March and 24 May 2012 (see paragraphs 143 and 117-121 below). Along the same lines, he found that what the applicants had presented as a “copy of the original protocol” of PEC no. 637 did not constitute valid evidence, as it failed to meet the requirements of the St Petersburg Elections Act. In respect of PECs nos. 637 and 651, the investigator noted that the decision of TEC no. 21 to conduct recounts had been lawful. The results of the recounts had not been declared void, and were correctly reflected on the City Electoral Commission’s website.
On 12 December 2011 the first five applicants lodged a complaint with the Supreme Court of Russia seeking the quashing of the decision of the СEC whereby the results of the elections had been officially approved. Their complaint concerned the results of the elections to the LA and to the Duma in the Kolpino district of St Petersburg (that is, electoral divisions nos. 18 and 19). According to the first five applicants, the official results published by the CEC did not correspond to the real results (see paragraphs 18-34 above).
In their complaint the applicants explained in what capacity they had participated in the elections. The first applicant indicated that he had stood as an SR candidate in the elections, and the other applicants indicated that they had been either members of the electoral commission, observers, or voters.
The applicants explained that the results of the elections published by the City Electoral Commission on its website and then reproduced by the CEC did not correspond to the protocols they had obtained from the relevant PECs, and that the overall difference between the figures in those protocols and the final results for Kolpino was close to 8,000 votes. The applicants produced copies of the “original” protocols and printouts of the final results from the website of the City Electoral Commission and asked for the latter results to be declared void, along with the decision of the City Electoral Commission and the decision of the CEC approving them.
On 23 December 2011 a Supreme Court judge refused to consider that complaint. The judge decided that the court had no jurisdiction to examine such a complaint, since the alleged violations did not affect the rights of voters, but might have affected the rights of the parties which had participated in the elections.
The applicants appealed, but on 9 February 2012 their appeal was dismissed. The Supreme Court of Russia, sitting as a court of appeal, noted that under the Duma Elections Act, section 92(4) and (5), the quashing of a decision of the CEC whereby the results of elections were approved was possible only where the violations complained of affected the interests of the political parties participating in the elections. Section 77 of the Basic Guarantees Act contained a similar provision. The court held that the violations complained of could have affected the interests of the parties whose candidates had stood in those elections, but not the rights of the voters.
Having obtained the Supreme Court’s decision of 9 February 2012, the same applicants brought a complaint before the Russian Constitutional Court. They complained about the Supreme Court’s interpretation of the Code of Civil Procedure (the CCP), the Basic Guarantees Act and the Duma Elections Act. According to the Supreme Court, the provisions of those instruments did not authorise voters to complain of incorrect vote counting: only political parties had standing to do so. In the applicants’ opinion, such an interpretation contradicted the Constitution.
On 22 April 2013 the Constitutional Court delivered a judgment on the applicants’ complaint (judgment no. 8-P/2013). It held that an individual voter had a legitimate interest in having his or her vote in support of a political party or candidate counted correctly. Thus, the “active electoral right” was not limited to the right to cast a vote freely at the polling station; it also included the process of counting votes and obtaining a correct final result which reflected the real will of the electorate. Voters should have the right to check the validity of the counting process. In addition, the interests of the parties participating in the elections and the voters might be different. The fact that the process of casting votes was secret did not preclude voters from complaining about incorrect recording of the results, since this affected the election process as a whole and could potentially undermine the legitimacy of the elected body. Therefore, it did not matter which party the particular voter had voted for at the elections. The Constitutional Court concluded that voters should have the right to lodge complaints about the process of counting votes (point 2.1 of the judgment).
As to the judicial avenue for such complaints, the Constitutional Court noted that although this was not the only possible legal mechanism, it existed in many European countries. Referring to Resolution 1897 (2012) of the Parliamentary Assembly of the Council of Europe, to the principles developed by the Venice Commission, and to the case of X v. Germany (no. 8227/78, Commission decision of 7 May 1979), the Constitutional Court noted that the law might create certain procedural barriers to such complaints: for example, it might establish short time-limits for complaints or set a minimum number of voters needed for such complaints to be brought.
The Constitutional Court concluded that judicial protection of electoral rights should be available to voters not only in connection with complaints about electoral campaigns and the process of voting, but also in respect of irregularities in the process of counting votes. At the same time, the exercise of the right to judicial protection must not disturb the stability of the functioning of elected bodies. Therefore, in order to prevent abuse of rights, only substantial violations in the process of the counting of votes could lead to a reconsideration of the results of the elections.
In point 2.4 of the judgment the Constitutional Court invited the federal legislature to secure the right to judicial review of the process of counting votes and determination of the final results of elections. The Constitutional Court added that courts conducting such reviews must be capable of declaring the results of elections in a particular constituency void. The exercise of the right to obtain judicial review of vote counting could be subject to rules and procedures established by a federal law.
The Constitutional Court then examined provisions of the legislative instruments referred to by the applicants (point 3.1 of the judgment). In the opinion of the Constitutional Court those instruments, if interpreted in compliance with the spirit of constitutional provisions, did not prevent voters from complaining about the process and results of the counting of votes by the electoral commissions, and allowed the courts, where the violations complained of prevented the correct determination of the will of the electorate, to declare the results of the elections void. In point 3.3 of the judgment the Constitutional Court held that a regional branch of a political party participating in the elections had standing to bring a complaint about violations of electoral law at regional level.
The Constitutional Court further held that voters should not be put in a situation of uncertainty as to the scope of their right of access to court and the procedure of exercising that right. It held that the federal legislature, having proclaimed that the courts were competent to examine complaints about breaches of the electoral law, had to adopt special rules to ensure that voters could exercise their right of access to court. The law must introduce rules to prevent competing political forces from abusing the right to bring judicial proceedings and from employing such practices as a tool for political manipulation. The rules of the CCP and the other instruments under examination by the Constitutional Court, as they were formulated at the time, implied that all participants in elections, irrespective of their status and the type and scale of the violation concerned, had equal rights to bring complaints before a court about any violation of their electoral rights. However, such a lack of differentiation was prejudicial to the stability of the democratic system and created an opportunity for abuse. The procedure for judicial review of irregularities in election procedures was unified at all levels of the electoral system; however, the interest of voters in having their vote counted accurately was stronger at the level of the precinct where they voted (as opposed to higher levels of the electoral system).
In the concluding paragraphs of the judgment, the Constitutional Court noted that the courts of general jurisdiction often interpreted the CCP and other applicable acts differently, as if those acts gave the right to bring a complaint about inaccuracies in the counting of votes only to political parties, but not to voters themselves. In part, this was due to the wording of point 20 of Supreme Court Decree no. 5 of 31 March 2011, where the Supreme Court had held that the courts could not examine complaints of breaches of the electoral law where those breaches did not affect the rights of the complainant.
The Constitutional Court concluded that such practices were related to the uncertainty of the underlying legislative provisions. Such practices were declared to be incompatible with the Constitution (point 4.3). The Constitutional Court ordered the federal legislature to enact a law which would define the procedure and conditions of voters’ exercise of their right to judicial review of the electoral process at the stages of vote counting and summing up the results. In the meantime the courts of general jurisdiction were ordered to accept for examination on the merits complaints by voters concerning the counting process at the level of the electoral precincts where they had voted.
On 12 December 2011 the first five applicants lodged a complaint with the St Petersburg City Court seeking to have overturned the decision of the City Electoral Commission of 12 December 2011 whereby the results of the elections to the LA and Duma were officially approved. This complaint was very similar to the one lodged with the Supreme Court (see section F above).
On 23 December 2011 a judge of the City Court refused to consider the complaint on the merits for procedural reasons. First, the judge observed that the City Court had jurisdiction over complaints lodged against the electoral commission at city level. However, in the opinion of the judge, the applicants’ complaint was directed against the actions of the lower commissions – precinct and territorial. Consequently, the City Court had no jurisdiction to examine those claims. Second, the judge found that the applicants had alleged that the officials of the electoral commissions were guilty of electoral fraud, which was a criminal act and could not be examined in civil proceedings. Third, in their complaint the applicants had not fulfilled certain formal requirements. The judge invited the applicants to amend their complaint accordingly, attach the missing documents, and resubmit it before 11 January 2012.
The applicants appealed. They indicated that they had not asked the court to find anybody criminally liable; the only purpose of their complaint was to have overturned the decision of the City Electoral Commission whereby it had approved the official results of the elections published on its website on 5 December 2011. Under Article 26 of the CCP and section 75(2) of the Basic Guarantees Act, the City Court was competent to examine complaints against the City Electoral Commission.
On 22 February 2012 the decision of 23 December 2011 was upheld on appeal by the Supreme Court. The Supreme Court confirmed that the City Court had no jurisdiction over the claim. The applicants claimed that they had not been informed about the decision of the Supreme Court but had learned about it from the Supreme Court’s website some time later.
In parallel to this appeal, on 10 and 11 January 2012 the applicants resubmitted their complaint, having made the amendments suggested by the City Court.
On 12 and 13 January 2012 the City Court refused to consider the complaint on the merits. The judge of the City Court found that the applicants were trying to contest the results of the elections in the Kolpino district, electoral divisions nos. 18 and 19 (TEC no. 21). However, under section 74(2) of the Basic Guarantees Act, such complaints fell within the jurisdiction of the corresponding district courts. As to the role of the City Electoral Commission, the judge observed that its duty was to summarise data received from the lower commissions. The court reiterated that the main subject of the applicants’ complaint was the data which had emanated from the precinct and territorial commissions; therefore, the applicants had to contest the actions of those commissions before the relevant district courts, and not before the City Court.
The applicants appealed. They insisted that they had not challenged the PECs’ decisions. Quite to the contrary, their case fully relied on the protocols issued by the PECs, which they had appended to their complaint. As to TEC no. 21, the applicants only knew that the TEC had received the protocols from the PECs, but not what had happened to them later and how the TEC had processed the data. The applicants had not participated in the process of calculating results at territorial level and did not know what figures TEC no. 21 had sent to the City Electoral Commission. They had learned about the incorrect figures from the official publication of the City Electoral Commission of 5 December 2011, as approved by its decision of 12 December 2011. Consequently, it was the decision of the City Electoral Commission which they were contesting.
In their appeal the applicants reiterated that they were simply comparing the data contained in the PEC result sheets and deemed to be correct and the “incorrect” data published by the City Electoral Commission. They did not know and could not know at what level the “correct” figures had turned into “incorrect” ones. However, the City Court was equally unable, without examining the case on the merits, to infer that the applicants’ complaint concerned allegedly unlawful actions on the part of the TEC.
The applicants contended, with reference to section 26 of the Duma Elections Act, that the City Electoral Commission’s role was not limited to a mechanical summing up of the data received from the lower commissions. The City Electoral Commission had a general duty to “coordinate the operations” of the lower commissions, ensure respect for electoral rights, guarantee that a uniform procedure was applied in the calculation of votes, and so on. It was also responsible for announcing and approving the final results of the elections. Therefore, the applicants contested the decision of the City Electoral Commission, and not the individual decisions of each PEC or TEC. On the strength of the above, the applicants concluded that their complaint, as directed against the actions of the City Electoral Commission, was within the jurisdiction of the St Petersburg City Court.
On 7 February 2012 the St Petersburg City Court, sitting in a three-judge formation, dismissed the appeal against the decision of 13 January 2012, repeating the findings of the lower court as to the question of jurisdiction. It confirmed that the City Electoral Commission merely summarised data received from the lower commissions. The City Court also indicated that point 39 of the Supreme Court Plenary Ruling no. 5 of 31 March 2011 stated that if a complaint about a decision approving election results referred to alleged violations on the part of the PECs, the subject of the complaint was in fact the decision of the PEC, and such cases were to be examined by the relevant district courts. A similar decision was reached by the City Court on 19 March 2012 on the appeal against the decision of 12 January 2012 (see paragraph 94 above).
The sixth applicant (Mr Belyakov) lodged a complaint with the St Petersburg City Court against the decision of the City Electoral Commission approving the final results of the voting. His complaint was similar to those of the first five applicants, but concerned only electoral precinct no. 637 and only the elections to the LA. He brought his complaint in his capacity as an individual voter in that precinct. The applicant claimed that according to the copy of the protocol he had received from a voting member of the electoral commission, the KPRF and Yabloko had received 200 and 128 votes respectively; however, according to the official results those parties had received only 14 and four votes. By contrast, the results of ER had grown from 380 to 804 (see paragraph 35 above). The applicant had not voted for either ER or SR. He believed that as a result of the falsification his vote had been effectively “stolen”, and given to a party which had benefited from the falsification. He asked the City Court to overturn the decision of the City Electoral Commission in the part concerning the precinct in question.
The applicant produced a copy of the protocol issued by PEC no. 637. This copy bore the official stamp of the PEC; it was signed by the head and eight members of the commission. The document specified that there had been no incidents during the voting and that no complaints about the voting process had been received.
In addition, the applicant submitted a copy of the protocol issued by TEC no. 21, and a printout of a screenshot of the webpage of the City Electoral Commission. The City Electoral Commission was indicated in the text of the complaint as “the interested party”.
On 25 January 2012 a judge of the St Petersburg City Court ruled that it was impossible to consider the applicant’s complaint without additional clarifications and documents. He noted that the applicant was challenging actions of the City Electoral Commission which were not decisions, records of results or anything similar. Therefore, the judge invited the applicant to specify to which action of the City Electoral Commission his challenge applied. The applicant was also invited to identify the decision of the City Electoral Commission approving the results in precinct no. 637, and to submit a copy of that decision “with another copy for the interested party”. The applicant was invited to explain what specific breach of the electoral legislation he was contesting and who was responsible for that breach, and to specify in what respect the City Electoral Commission had not acted in accordance with the law.
On 3 February 2012 the sixth applicant, having provided additional material to supplement his complaint, resubmitted it to the City Court.
On 9 February 2012 a judge of the City Court refused to consider the complaint on the merits, finding that the applicant had failed to submit the clarifications and additional documents requested on 25 January 2012. He ruled as follows:
The applicant appealed. He argued that he had submitted a copy of the protocol to the court. He had received that copy from a member of the PEC, who had obtained it after the counting of votes was over. The City Electoral Commission (the interested party) had the original PEC protocol, so it was absurd to require him to submit anything more than he had already submitted to the court.
On 5 March 2012 the St Petersburg City Court, on appeal, upheld the decision of 9 February 2012. It noted that the copy which the applicant had submitted did not indicate whether it was a copy of the original document, no. 1 or 2. As can be understood from the appeal decision, the applicant should have submitted to the District Court a copy made from the original document, either no. 1 or no. 2, so that that copy could be transmitted to the “interested party” (that is, the City Electoral Commission); without such a document the applicant’s complaint could not be examined.
The Government specified in their memorandum of 14 October 2014 that copy no. 1 of the original document drawn up by the PEC contained a number of annexes, such as separate opinions of the commission’s members and complaints received during the voting. This copy had been transferred to the relevant TEC. Copy no. 2 had been kept at the precinct office and made available to the public; following this it too had been transferred to the territorial commission. No copies of this document were forwarded to the City Electoral Commission, since the TECs had provided it with a summary of the information received from the relevant precinct commissions; therefore the City Electoral Commission had no copies of the original protocols from the precincts.
On 19 December 2011 the St Petersburg branch of SR lodged a complaint with the St Petersburg City Court. The complaint concerned several electoral divisions, in particular nos. 15, 17, 22 and 33. The party complained, in particular, about the difference between the official results and the results set out in the copies of the documents received by the observers and members of the PECs in those divisions. They also indicated that the City Electoral Commission had failed to examine properly eighteen complaints lodged by SR and eighty-seven complaints lodged by others.
On 27 February 2012 the St Petersburg City Court dismissed the complaint. It found that all the administrative complaints to the City Electoral Commission had been properly discussed and addressed. The City Court further found that the City Electoral Commission’s decision approving the results of the elections had been adopted unanimously and in accordance with the procedure set out by the law. An employee of the City Electoral Commission had informed the complainants of the time and the date of the meeting of the Commission, so they had been given the chance to attend. Some of those attending the meeting had been affiliated to SR. Section 30(1) of the Basic Guarantees Act did not require that every person on the list established in that provision be notified. The Commission had an obligation to notify them “within the bounds of feasibility” (“в пределах возможностей”). Some representatives of SR had been informed about the meeting and could have passed that information on to others. In fact, information about the meeting of 12 December 2012 had not been published in the media or on the “Vybory” (“Elections”) database, but this was immaterial. The City Court concluded that the City Electoral Commission had not committed any breach of the law which would affect the results of the election.
SR appealed. On 23 May 2012 the Supreme Court upheld the City Court’s judgment. In addition to the City Court’s arguments, it noted that although the City Electoral Commission had not taken individual decisions on each and every complaint it had received between 4 and 12 December 2012, that could not affect the lawfulness of its final decision to approve the results of the elections. The members of the Commission had been informed about the complaints received by the Commission, and that had been enough to satisfy the requirements of the law. In particular, it was perfectly acceptable that all those complaints had been examined by a special working group created within the Commission, and not the Commission itself. The Supreme Court also noted that, in breach of the law, the individuals who had lodged the complaints with the City Electoral Commission had not been invited to be present for the examination of their complaints; however, that was not a sufficient ground for declaring the final decision of the City Electoral Commission unlawful. The Supreme Court also held that the “consolidated protocols” containing the election results at city level had been approved in accordance with the correct procedure and were therefore lawful. The failure of the City Electoral Commission to notify all interested parties in accordance with section 30(1) of the Basic Guarantees Act did not constitute a ground for invalidating the results of the elections, since “it had not prevented the actual will of the voters from being determined”.
The Supreme Court also held that the claimants had failed to prove that the complaints which the City Electoral Commission had received could have affected the results of the voting. In essence, those complaints were challenging the results of the voting in certain electoral precincts. However, the decisions of the PECs had to be challenged before the district courts. The Supreme Court concluded that “since it has not been established that there have been any breaches of electoral law which would affect [the determination of] the will of the voters”, the lower court had been correct to dismiss the complaint.
On 25 January 2012 the sixth applicant (Mr Belyakov, precinct no. 637) lodged a complaint with the Kolpino District Court concerning the actions of TEC no. 21 (see paragraph 35 above).
On 27 January 2012 the District Court returned the complaint to the applicant. It noted that he had failed to submit a sufficient number of copies of his complaint and annexes: in particular, he had not submitted a copy for the prosecutor’s office. Furthermore, the copy of the document on which he had relied was signed by the secretary of the TEC but not by its chairman, and the TEC protocols had not been signed by all of its members. The District Court invited the applicant to add the missing documents and resubmit his complaint.
On 7 February 2012 the applicant resubmitted the complaint.
On 1 March 2012 the Kolpino District Court decided that it had no jurisdiction to examine the complaint. It noted that the applicant had complained, as a voter, of a breach of his “active electoral right” (the right to vote). However, in the opinion of the District Court the actions of the TEC which the applicant contested and which concerned the allegedly incorrect distribution of votes among the political parties might have affected the interests of those parties but not the interests of the individual voters. The applicant had participated in the elections as a candidate, but for a different precinct. The court concluded that the applicant’s rights had not been affected by the impugned acts of the TEC, and discontinued the examination of the case.
The applicant appealed. On 12 April 2012 the St Petersburg City Court ordered the lower court to examine the case on the merits, disagreeing with its conclusion that the actions of TEC no. 21 had not affected the applicant’s rights as a voter.
On 24 May 2012 the Kolpino District Court examined the complaint. According to the applicant, he requested the examination of a number of witnesses, in particular members, chairmen and observers of the electoral commissions concerned. The District Court refused to call any witnesses; it only heard the applicant, representatives of TEC no. 21, the City Electoral Commission, and a prosecutor. The latter recommended dismissing the applicant’s complaint as unfounded.
The District Court dismissed the applicant’s complaint. The relevant part of its decision reads as follows:
“... In support of his arguments ... the claimant submitted a copy of the protocols from PEC no. 637, the protocols from TEC no. 21 ... and the consolidated protocols ... for the election as a whole.
However, those documents were drawn up in breach of the mandatory formal requirements established by the Basic Guarantees Act. [Namely], in breach of [the relevant provision of the Act] the copy of the protocols does not indicate the running number of the original copy it was made from. In breach of [the relevant provision of the Act] numerical data in the protocol are not written out in words. [In breach of the provisions of the law] the copy of the protocol did not contain the entries ‘true copy’ or ‘exact [copy]’, and did not indicate the date and the time the copy was issued.”
Furthermore, the District Court observed that the PEC protocol contained inconsistent data. For example, the number of valid ballot papers noted in the table amounted to 1,276, and the aggregate number of votes for all candidate parties was indicated as 1,246, whereas that number should correspond to the number of valid ballot papers. The aggregate number of ballot papers deposited in the stationary boxes, those deposited in the mobile boxes, and “cancelled ballot papers”, which should correspond to the number of ballot papers received by the precinct commission, was higher (1,630 instead of 1,600). The District Court concluded that the copy of the PEC protocol relied upon by the claimant was inadmissible in evidence.
The District Court further established that on 5 December 2011 the TEC had overturned the decision of PEC no. 637 approving the election results and had ordered a full recount. The applicant had not contested that decision. The City Electoral Commission submitted to the District Court “copy no. 2” of the PEC protocols marked “recount”. The data contained in that copy, drawn up following the recount, corresponded to the officially approved results of the elections. That copy had all the necessary entries and fully met the formal requirements. Under the law, if the original protocols contained inconsistent data the PEC was entitled to conduct a recount and issue a new return. The court refused to grant the applicant’s requests for a number of witnesses to be called, including the chairman of the PEC and observers, having concluded that the documents submitted had provided sufficient evidence about the outcome of the results.
The District Court referred again to the applicable legislation, which provided for a revision of the results of an election only where breaches of the law were such as to prevent the real opinion of the voters from being established. The court concluded that the applicant’s complaint did not reveal any such breach. It dismissed the applicant’s complaint and refused to declare void the official results of the elections in precinct no. 637.
The applicant appealed. He submitted that, according to his information, no recount had been conducted. The law required the mandatory presence of all the PEC members and observers at any recount; however, they had not been invited for that purpose. Even if a recount had taken place, it would have been unlawful. The fact that the copy of the protocols submitted by the applicant to the court did not correspond to the copy of the protocols at the disposal of the City Electoral Commission had not been contested by the first-instance court. The very reference to a version for the “recount” confirmed the existence of two different results. In the course of the hearing the applicant had repeatedly asked the District Court to ascertain whether the recount had had any lawful basis, but the court had failed to address that argument. The applicant claimed that the witnesses whose appearance he had sought would have been able to confirm that no recount had taken place. The alleged inconsistencies in the original table were immaterial; what mattered was that the original results calculation had been replaced with a new one, and that this second document was a concoction.
According to the applicant’s statement of appeal, the alleged recount had been carried out in response to a complaint by a voter, a Mr L. However, the “original” document indicated that the PEC had received no complaints from voters or observers. Furthermore, according to the letter of 26 December 2011 from the TEC chairman in reply to the applicant’s complaint, before finally signing the protocols the commission had received “no complaints from the representatives of the political parties”. The applicant concluded that the “complaint by Mr L.”, which had served as a pretext for the secret recount, was a fake.
The applicant argued that he had been unable to challenge the decision of the TEC to conduct a recount, because that decision had been concealed from the public and representatives of the parties and had become apparent only from the documents submitted by the City Electoral Commission to the court.
On 16 August 2012 the St Petersburg City Court, sitting as a court of appeal, dismissed the sixth applicant’s appeal, endorsing the reasons adduced by the District Court. The appeal court did not comment on the Kolpino District Court’s refusal to call witnesses. It noted that the evidence produced by the applicant was unreliable, whereas the evidence produced by the TEC and the City Electoral Commission was in conformity with the formal requirements, and the District Court had found it convincing. The City Court concluded that the applicant had failed to prove his allegations.
On 14 December 2011 the seventh applicant (Mr Yakushenko) lodged a complaint with the Kolpino District Court alleging falsification of the results of voting in Kolpino as a whole (electoral divisions nos. 18 and 19). His complaint concerned the following fifty-four precincts: nos. 623, 625, 626, 627, 628, 629, 630, 631, 632, 633, 634, 635, 636, 637, 638, 640, 641, 642, 643, 644, 645, 646, 647, 648, 649, 650, 651, 652, 653, 654, 655, 657, 658, 661, 662, 663, 664, 666, 667, 668, 669, 670, 671, 672, 673, 675, 678, 680, 681, 682, 683, 684, 685 and 687. These proceedings therefore concerned the precincts challenged by the first six applicants in the domestic proceedings and before this Court (see paragraphs 18-36 above).
On 19 December 2011 the Kolpino District Court returned the complaint to the seventh applicant unexamined and informed him that it should have been submitted to the City Court.
On 28 December 2011 the applicant resubmitted the complaint to the City Court, but on 29 December 2011 it was returned unexamined. The City Court was of the opinion that the complaint fell within the jurisdiction of the Kolpino District Court. The applicant appealed, but on 26 January 2012 the City Court, sitting as a court of appeal, confirmed that it had no jurisdiction to examine such a case.
On 19 January 2012 the applicant resubmitted his complaint to the Kolpino District Court.
On 16 July 2012 the Kolpino District Court examined the complaint. A copy of the transcript of these proceedings has been submitted by the Government.
According to the decision and the transcript, the District Court heard submissions from the prosecutor, who recommended dismissing the complaint. The applicant made several requests for certain witnesses to be examined and documents disclosed; some of those requests were refused and others were granted. Thus, the court heard twenty-three witnesses whose appearance had been requested by the applicant, namely observers and members of electoral commissions (including some of the applicants in the present case). They described their role in the elections, and explained how they had received copies of the protocols with the results. Most of the witnesses testified that the data in the protocols which they had received at the polling stations differed significantly from the official results published by the CEC, that they had not been notified of any recounts and that they had not witnessed a recount at the TEC, although some of them had been there to deliver the PEC protocols.
The judgment of the District Court started with a summary of the applicable electoral legislation and witness statements. The court further observed that “[the applicant] did not indicate in his statement and additional submissions how his rights [to vote and to be elected] had been violated”. Furthermore, the court observed that the copies of the protocols submitted by the applicant did not meet certain formal requirements.
On the basis of the witness statements the court concluded that none of the witnesses had given their copies of the protocols personally to the seventh applicant (Mr Yakushenko). Furthermore, at three polling stations (nos. 640, 644 and 653) the copies of the protocols obtained from the PECs contained data which did not correspond to the data in the “original” protocols submitted by the claimant.
The District Court stressed that it was its duty to ascertain whether an official document had been issued by a body which had been entitled to do so, whether it had been signed by a duly authorised person and had other requisite entries, how it had been copied and stored, whether the copy submitted to the court was identical to the original, and so on. The court observed that it could not rely on copies where the originals had been lost, the copies produced by the parties were not identical, or it was impossible to establish the actual content of the document on the basis of other evidence.
On the strength of the above, the court concluded that the copies of protocols submitted by the claimant could not be admitted in evidence. It also found that the claimant had not submitted other evidence to show that the will of the voters had not been properly reflected.
The District Court refused to declare unlawful the “recount” of votes ordered by TEC no. 21 on 5 December 2011 in polling stations nos. 627, 630, 633, 635, 637, 638, 641, 646, 651, 652, 654, 657, 661, 662, 664, 665, 666, 667, 668, 675, 678, 680, 681 and 682. According to the court, the supervising electoral commission had the power to order a recount if the protocols received from the lower commissions contained “errors [or] discrepancies” or if there were “doubts as to whether the protocols had been drawn up correctly”. The law also entitled the supervising commission to conduct the recount itself and issue a new protocol. The District Court referred to the following reasons for the recount: “doubts as to whether the protocols of the precinct commissions were drawn up correctly, complaints of breaches of the law committed by the PECs during the counting of the votes, as well as a complaint by Mr L., a candidate on the SR list”.
The court referred to a witness statement by Ms S., a member of TEC no. 21. According to Ms S., the TEC had decided to conduct recounts; she had personally recounted votes with the commission’s deputy chairman, Mr R. Observers and members of the lower commissions had been entitled to observe the recount. The TEC included members from different parties. An SR member of the TEC, Ms Sh., “was very often present” during the recount. In addition, observers had been present at the TEC and supervised the process of counting and decision-making. All the complaints had been read out by the TEC chairman and discussed. Most of the complaints related to the difference between the results reported in the copies of the protocols received by the observers and “the data in the possession of the TEC”. The protocols which were submitted to the TEC differed from the protocols which had been given to the observers; this was why the TEC had decided to recount the votes. As a result, the information which was in the possession of the TEC had been confirmed. When the recount was being conducted the chairmen of the PECs concerned had not been present, but the candidates had been. The observers had not been informed of the recount, but they had in any event been present at the TEC; all the actions of the TEC had been visible to them. As a result of the recount the TEC had drawn up new protocols.
Ms S.’s witness statement, made on 28 May 2012 and reflected in the transcript of the hearing, gave additional details compared to what was cited in the District Court’s judgment. In particular, the actual recount had taken place in the basement room of the district administration building where the TEC was located, and that room had remained closed since it contained sealed bags with the ballot papers delivered from the PECs. Mr R. had opened the bags in her presence, breaking the seals which had been placed by the PECs. The room had contained no furniture, and they had brought only two chairs into it. The recount had been carried out by her and Mr R., and each precinct had taken about two hours to count. This work had lasted almost the entire day of 5 December 2011. While no one else had been specifically invited to the room, the observers, other members of the TEC and others had been able to enter it and observe the recount. The new protocols had then been drawn up in the main room used by the TEC, upstairs. Ms S. was unable to say what had happened to the “original” protocols.
The District Court concluded that by holding a recount TEC no. 21 had acted within its powers, and there was no reason to declare those actions unlawful. PEC members had the right to be present during a recount, but their absence during the recount “did not constitute a ground for declaring the recount unlawful”. On the basis of the above, the District Court dismissed the applicant’s complaint.
The applicant appealed.
On 18 October 2012 the St Petersburg City Court dismissed the applicant’s appeal. Its reasoning, which was almost identical to the judgment of the District Court, can be summarised as follows. First, the first-instance court had been correct not to take into account the copies of protocols submitted by the applicant, since the witnesses questioned in the court did not confirm that they had given their copies directly to him. The copies submitted by the applicant did not meet the formal requirements. In addition, the copies of the protocols concerning precincts nos. 640, 644 and 653 did not correspond to the copies which were in the archives of the three respective PECs. The applicant had failed to prove that the elections had been tainted by violations of the electoral law which had prevented the will of the voters from being established. According to the decisions issued by TEC no. 21 on 5 December 2011, the results had been declared void in the following precincts: nos. 667, 666, 646, 641, 668, 665, 664, 662, 657, 654, 652, 651, 641, 638, 635, 637, 681, 680, 678, 675, 630, 682, 627 and 629. In all those precincts the TEC had conducted recounts, on the basis of “doubts as to whether the protocols were drawn up correctly”, “complaints of violations of the law”, and “a complaint by Mr L.”. The TEC’s actions had been lawful. The TEC members had had the right to be present during the recount, but they had not been obliged to be there; consequently, their absence had not affected the lawfulness of the recount.
In parallel to the above, the St Petersburg branch of SR challenged the results of the elections to the LA in electoral division no. 19 in Kolpino (TEC no. 21). These results are challenged by the first to fifth applicants (see paragraphs 18-34 above). The claimant stressed that information about eighteen electoral precincts (including the precincts challenged by the five applicants) had been recorded incorrectly, that is to say differently from the “original” protocols issued as a result of the calculation of votes at the precinct commissions, in the presence of all the members of those commissions and observers. The complaints which had subsequently been lodged with the territorial commission could not serve as valid grounds for invalidating these results and ordering recounts, as no complaints had been lodged or recorded at the time of the calculation of the total number of votes in each of the precincts.
On 22 March 2012 the Kolpino District Court dismissed the complaint (the arguments were similar to those employed later in its decision of 16 July 2012, described in paragraphs 130-139 above). In particular, the court was of the opinion that the copies of documents relied upon by the claimant party did not comply with the requirements of the relevant legislative provisions, and could not serve as valid grounds for a challenge to the official results. By contrast, the results of the recounts in the electoral precincts concerned, including those challenged by the applicants, had been drawn up in line with the statutory requirements and did not raise any doubts as to their authenticity and lawfulness. No additional witnesses had been called by the District Court. The parties’ observations also indicate that on 30 May 2012 the St Petersburg City Court dismissed an appeal by the party and upheld the judgment.
The St Petersburg branch of SR lodged a complaint about the lawfulness and results of elections to the LA in two “closed” electoral precincts – nos. 1852 and 1853 of electoral division no. 17 (see paragraph 40 above, complaint lodged by the ninth applicant). The claimant argued that the elections in the two precincts, which had been created on 30 November 2011 by a decision of TEC no. 3 in the territory of a large heavy machinery plant (OAO Kirovsky Zavod), had been unlawful. They pointed out, inter alia, that the PECs had been formed in breach of the relevant legal requirements and comprised fewer members than prescribed by the law (three members each, instead of no fewer than seven, in view of the fact that there were over 1,000 voters in each precinct); that no members from the applicant party had been appointed; and that on election day no observers and no candidates had been allowed access to the polling stations by the security guards of the enterprise where the voting was taking place.
On 16 August 2012 the Kirovsky District Court of St Petersburg dismissed the complaint. The court found that the exact number of voters was unknown in advance but estimated at about 2,000, and therefore that establishing two three-member commissions was justified; that the claimant had failed to challenge the decisions of TEC no. 3 of 30 November 2011 setting up the two precincts; and that it was the party’s responsibility to arrange for invitations for its observers to the plant in advance, and not during the election weekend itself. The court refused to call any witnesses or to seek any additional information, such as the electoral roll or information about exclusion of voters from the roll at their regular places of residence. It rejected the need to check whether there were any observers at the PECs, since “the absence or presence of observers did not affect the results of the elections, and there are no grounds to believe that the voters were not able to express their true will”. The party appealed, but on 17 October 2012 the St Petersburg City Court dismissed the appeal and upheld the judgment of the District Court.
The St Petersburg branch of SR lodged a complaint about the lawfulness and results of elections to the LA in several of the electoral precincts comprising electoral division no. 17 (see complaint by the ninth applicant, paragraph 39 above). They stressed that the results in ten precincts had been invalidated by TEC no. 3 without valid reasons being given, that the changes had led to a loss of votes for the claimant, and that the conduct of recount had entailed breaches of the relevant legislation.
On 22 June 2012 the Kirovskiy District Court of St Petersburg dismissed the complaint. First, the District Court challenged the authenticity of the copies of the protocols relied upon by the claimant, on the following grounds: the absence of a reference to the running number of the original copy of the return from which the copy had been made; the date, time and place it had been drawn up; a full record of the names of the PEC chairmen and members who had signed it; and inscriptions certifying the correctness of the copy. Second, in eight of the precincts the recount had been ordered by the TEC. The TEC submitted a copy of its report, which noted breaches in formalising these eight PEC reports, and the court agreed that the breaches were serious (unrecorded corrections; inconsistency between the sum of the number of votes cast for each party and the total number of votes cast; difference between the figures noted numerically and spelled out, and so on). In such circumstances, the decisions to conduct a recount had been a lawful one; the final returns issued following the recounts had been correct and the results matched the figures announced by the City Electoral Commission. The court did not find it necessary to call any additional witnesses from the PECs or the TEC concerned, as suggested by the claimant.
The St Petersburg City Court, upon appeal, upheld the District Court’s decision on 27 August 2012.
The St Petersburg branch of SR lodged a complaint about the lawfulness and results of elections to LA in several precincts in electoral division no. 15 (see complaint by the eleventh applicant, paragraphs 43 et seq. above). The Kirovskiy District Court dismissed the complaint on 15 May 2012. That decision was upheld by the St Petersburg City Court on appeal on 23 July 2012.
The St Petersburg branch of SR lodged a complaint about the lawfulness and results of elections to the LA in several precincts in electoral division no. 33 (see complaint by the tenth applicant, paragraphs 41 et seq. above). The Moskovskiy District Court dismissed the complaint on 22 May 2012. No appeal against that ruling was lodged.
The applicants presented copies of some of the “original” documents received by them which had served as the basis for their complaints.
They also submitted a graphic table containing information about the differences between the “original” and official results in electoral divisions nos. 15, 18, 17, 19, 22 and 33 of St Petersburg, precinct by precinct. Their document stated that the votes had been recounted in 100 electoral precincts in St Petersburg in the Duma elections and in eighty-six precincts in the LA elections. Following recounts, in the Duma elections ER’s results were higher in eighty-six precincts and lower in none; SR’s results were higher in three precincts and lower in seventy-eight; the KPRF’s results were higher in six and lower in forty-eight; and Yabloko’s results were higher in four and lower in forty-five. In the LA elections, ER’s results were higher in ninety-three precincts and lower in seven; SR’s results were higher in three precincts and lower in eighty-seven; the KPRF’s results were higher in three precincts and lower in fifty-two; and Yabloko’s results were higher in one precinct and lower in seventy-nine.
The Government submitted a number of copies of official documents and composite tables containing information about the procedure and results of the recounts in some of the precincts where the results were contested by the applicants, as well as others. The relevant data can be summarised as follows.
The Government submitted copies of the documents ordering recounts in a number of precincts, following decisions taken by the relevant TECs. Some of them concern the precincts where the results were challenged by the applicants. For example, recounts in eleven of the precincts where the results were challenged by the tenth applicant (see paragraph 41 above) had occurred as a result of a decision by TEC no. 27 (electoral division no. 33). Similarly worded decisions, signed by the TEC chairman and secretary at an unspecified time on 5 December 2011, stated that there were “complaints lodged with the territorial electoral commission about breaches of legislation occurring in precinct electoral commission no. ... during the counting of votes, and other evidence providing objective reasons to doubt the correctness of the protocols”. The identical decisions then stated that, in the circumstances, the alleged breaches could be overcome by conducting recounts. The precinct commissions concerned were directed to carry out the recounts “immediately” and to draw up new protocols marked “recount”. Identical decisions were also rendered by the relevant TECs in respect of electoral precincts nos. 637 (see paragraph 35 above), 557 and 597 (see paragraph 43 above). The decisions in respect of electoral precincts nos.  486 (see paragraph 39 above), 651 (see paragraph 32 above), 652 (see paragraph 29 above), 654 (see paragraph 33 above) were identical to the above, with the difference that the order was for the recounts to be conducted by the TEC itself.
One of the protocols indicated the names and presence of members of TECs no. 3 (recounts for electoral precincts nos. 486 and 509), no. 4 (recounts for precincts nos. 725, 728, 731, 733, 742, and 743), no. 7 (recounts for precincts nos. 605 and 610), no. 21 (recounts for precincts nos. 638, 646, 651, 652, 654, 657, 662, 664, 665, 667, 668) and no. 27 (recounts for precincts nos. 1071, 1091, 1099, 1113 and, separately, for no. 1109). It appears from these documents that each TEC had eight members from various political parties and NGOs, including, in each commission, a member from SR and a member from the KPRF. In the six protocols submitted, the members from SR and the KPRF were present in only one commission each during the recounts, namely no. 21 for SR and no. 4 for the KPRF; all the other members were present during the recounts, with one exception.
The Government also submitted lists indicating the composition of dozens of PECs, as well as copies of the protocols drawn up by the PECs as a result of the original counts, or the recounts wherever they had taken place. Wherever there had been a recount it was noted by hand on the first page of the protocol. No copies of the initial protocols, that is, those drawn up prior to the recounts, were submitted. It appears from these documents that wherever recounts were conducted by PECs their members appointed by SR and/or the KPRF were systematically absent. To give two examples, in electoral division no. 33, where the results were challenged by the tenth applicant, the Government submitted copies of sixteen protocols for the LA elections; of those, eleven were marked “recount”. In those marked “recount”, the list of signatures of the PEC members show that the members appointed by SR and the KPRF were not present in any of them, wherever these political parties had appointed representatives to these commissions. Similarly, in electoral division no. 19, where the results were challenged by the first to fifth applicants, the Government submitted copies of nineteen precinct protocols, or, where the recount had taken place at the TEC, protocols from territorial commissions. These protocols indicated that recounts had been conducted by precinct commissions in four cases; in none of them had the members appointed by SR and the KPRF been present during the recount.
The Government also summarised all breaches of formal requirements in the “original” copies of protocols submitted by the applicants in respect of the precinct commissions challenged by them. Thus, the most common problems raised by the protocols relied upon by the applicants were identified as follows: the running number of the original from which the copy had been taken was not indicated, the address of the precinct commission was missing, the exact time at which the copy was drawn up was not indicated, the figures were not spelled out in writing, not all names and signatures of the members of the PECs were listed, the commission’s stamp was missing, the third page of the protocol was missing, or the copies were not certified with an inscription confirming their authenticity.
In their additional submissions of 22 May 2015, the Government presented a report on ninety-nine precincts initially concerned by this complaint. The report contained the following data: the serial numbers of the PECs and TECs, whether a recount had taken place, the grounds for any recount (recorded as “doubts about correctness and complaints” in all cases) and the body which had conducted the recount, the presence of members of the commission concerned during the recount, the exact timing of the recount, the total number of votes cast, and the number of votes gained and lost by a particular party (the last two fields were not filled in for all precincts). This table can be summarised as follows:
TEC no. 3, division no. 17, covered thirty-two precincts (elections to the LA). The results in twelve precincts were challenged by Mr Truskanov, the ninth applicant. Of twelve precincts challenged, eight were subject to recounts, all of them ordered by TEC no. 3 on 5 December 2011. Recounts in two precincts were conducted by the TEC itself (nos. 486 and 509), and in six by the PECs concerned (nos. 489, 496, 497, 500, 501 and 508). As a result of the recounts, in eight of the precincts concerned where these figures were indicated, the table showed, among other things, a higher vote for ER in four precincts (in no. 496 an increase by 343 votes out of 1,149 votes cast; in no. 500 by 200 votes out of 895 votes cast; in no. 501 by 300 votes out of 1,054 votes cast; and in no. 508 by 280 out of 1,025 votes cast). At the same time, ER’s vote went down in two precincts (in no. 489 by 40 votes out of 686 votes cast, and in no. 496 by 104 votes out of 675 cast). SR lost votes in two precincts (in no. 489 by 120 votes out of 686 votes cast, and in no. 496 by 130 votes out of 677 cast) and gained in one (no. 497, by 10 votes out of 1,149 cast).
TEC no. 7, division no. 15, covered thirty-three precincts (elections to the LA). The results in twenty precincts were challenged by Mr Shestakov, the eleventh applicant. Of the twenty precincts, five were subject to recounts, all of them ordered by the TEC on 5 December 2011. Recounts were conducted in three precincts by the TEC and in two by PECs; no increase or decrease for particular parties was indicated in these recounts. The recount conducted by the TEC was carried out by its six members between 7.45 a.m. and 8.43 a.m.: they thus recounted 4,668 votes in three precincts in 58 minutes.
TEC no. 21, division no. 18, covered thirty-two precincts (elections to the LA). The results in two of them (PECs nos. 623 and 637) were challenged by Mr Yakushenko and Mr Belyakov, the seventh and sixth applicants. A recount in PEC no. 637 was ordered by the TEC on 5 December 2011 and carried out by the PEC concerned at 7.10 p.m. that day; no increase or decrease for particular parties was indicated in that recount.
TEC no. 21, division no. 19, covered thirty-four precincts (elections to the LA). The results in twenty-one of them were challenged by the first to fifth applicants. Of the twenty-one challenged, fourteen were recounted: this was ordered by the TEC on 5 December 2011. The recount was conducted by the TEC in eleven of the fourteen cases; no increase or decrease for particular parties was indicated by the Government. The times at which the recounts had been concluded by the TEC were indicated on 5 December 2011 as between 4.05 p.m. and 7.50 p.m. In particular, the recount in PEC no. 668 was concluded at 4.05 p.m. (907 votes); PEC no. 646 was concluded at 5.10 p.m. (1,002 votes); PEC no. 667 was concluded at 5.20 p.m. (874 votes); PECs no. 638 (1,351 votes) and 657 (1,122 votes) were concluded at 5.40 p.m.; and PECs nos. 652 (983 votes) and 654 (1,066 votes) were concluded at 7.50 p.m. Thus, the table indicates that on 5 December 2011 TEC no. 21 recounted 11,321 votes cast in eleven precincts in three hours and forty-five minutes.
TEC no. 4, division no. 22, covered thirty-four precincts (elections to the LA). The results in twenty-two precincts were challenged by Mr Payalin, the eighth applicant (complaint withdrawn). Of the twenty-two precincts, recounts were carried out at six; all the recounts were ordered by the TEC on 5 December 2011. In addition, in PEC no. 722 there was no formal recount, but a new result was drawn up “owing to a technical error”, at 8 p.m. on 6 December 2011 by eight of the twelve PEC members; it resulted in the reassignment of 482 votes from ER to the KPRF (out of 1,600 votes cast). Recounts were ordered and carried out by the TEC in six precincts (a total of 6,565 votes); these ballots were recounted by six members of the TEC in forty-five minutes, between 9.05 p.m. and 9.50 p.m. on 5 December 2011. In all six precincts ER gained between 202 (PEC no. 743, total number of votes cast 1,083) and 612 votes (PEC no. 725, total number of votes cast 1,269) in each precinct, the exact number of votes lost by the LDPR. The total number of votes gained by ER in these six precincts following recounts amounted to 2,422 votes (out of 6,565 votes cast).
TEC no. 27, division no. 33, covered forty precincts (elections to the LA). The results in eighteen of them were challenged by Ms Pushkareva, the tenth applicant. Of those eighteen, eleven were recounted: all the recounts were ordered by the TEC on 5 December 2011. Only one precinct was recounted at the TEC, at 9.15 a.m. on 5 December 2011: no. 1109, where as a result ER gained 322 votes (the losses were incurred by SR (down by 122 votes), the KPRF (down 100) and Yabloko (down 100)). Other precincts were recounted by a majority of the members of the PECs concerned in the early hours of 5 December 2011; as a result, ER’s vote increased in five of the eight precincts where this was indicated in the table submitted by the Government. The largest gain was in PEC no. 1090, where the number of votes cast for ER increased by 900 out of 1,764 votes cast (no indication was given of corresponding losses by other parties). Of the other three precincts, ER lost votes in two (in PEC no. 1098, down by 337 out of 616 votes cast; and in PEC no. 1127, down by 140 out of 898 votes cast). However, it was not indicated that any of these losses had led to corresponding increases for any other party, in contrast to the losses sustained, for example, in PEC no. 1109 by three parties.
TEC no. 21, “Yuzhnaya” division, covered 337 precincts (elections to the State Duma). The results of four of them were challenged by Ms Andronova, Mr Andronov, Ms Nikolayeva and Mr Sizenov, the second to fifth applicants. The table contains information about recounts in three precincts (nos. 651, 652 and 654) and does not indicate whether any parties lost or gained any votes as a result. The recount was ordered and carried out by the TEC on 5 December 2011; it lasted for two hours, from 11 a.m. to 1 p.m., and covered 3,175 votes.
Where the table indicated that there had been a recount, the number of members of the PECs and TECs present was always a majority (six out of eight for the TECs concerned; six, seven, eight or nine out of eleven or up to ten and eleven out of thirteen members in the PECs concerned), except for one PEC, no. 1127 (TEC no. 27, territory 33), where all eleven members were present at the recount concluded at 7 a.m. on 5 December 2011, and where, as the only different result, ER had lost 140 votes out of 898 votes cast.
In total, the table submitted by the Government contains information about recounts in forty-eight precincts (forty-five in the elections to the LA and three in the Duma elections), covering cumulatively over 51,000 votes cast (not all precincts mentioned in the Government table contained these data). In the twenty-two precincts where those data were at least partially indicated for the LA elections (covering over 24,000 votes), as a result of recounts, ER gained a total of 5,155 votes and lost a total of 621 votes; SR gained a total of 10 votes and lost a total of 422 votes; the KPRF gained no votes and lost 215 votes; Yabloko gained 38 votes and lost 311. In addition, in one precinct (no. 722, see paragraph 163 above) 482 votes were reassigned from ER to the KPRF in a new protocol compiled by the relevant PEC.
The second table, submitted by the Government on 22 May 2015, contains certain information about the results of recounts in over 100 precincts; however, this information is not organised into divisions and TECs, and contains no reference to the present case. It does not contain information about the precincts where the results were challenged by the applicants. From this table it appears that for many precincts a “second entry” was made on 11 December 2011 (the grounds for this “second entry” are not explained and it is unclear whether there was a formal recount). As a result of this “second entry” many final figures for the parties participating in the elections had been changed as compared to the “first entry” made on 5 December 2011.
On 2 July 2014 the chairman of the CEC, Mr Churov, sought to check the authenticity of the “original” protocols relied upon by the applicants in the present case. On 22 July 2014 the Ministry of the Interior forensic expert centre concluded that the copies of the protocols relied upon by the tenth applicant (PECs nos. 1089 and 1104) had been certified by stamps which differed from the stamps used by those PECs to certify the copies submitted to the City Electoral Commission. For all the other protocols no such conclusion could be drawn. Furthermore, several copies submitted by the applicants differed from the copies submitted by the CEC, meaning that those two sets of documents had not been simply reproduced by means of electronic reproduction. The expert report was unable to conclude that the documents in question had been tampered with or subjected to any changes or alterations.
In September 2014 the chairman of the CEC wrote to the St Petersburg Department of the Investigative Committee. He argued that the applicants in the present case had submitted documents to the European Court which they claimed were authentic copies of the “original” election protocols from a number of precincts in St Petersburg. The letter pointed out that these documents raised doubts as to their authenticity, and asked the Investigative Committee to carry out an inquiry into the matter. On 25 September 2014 the Kirovskiy District Department of the Investigative Committee initiated an inquiry (проверка) into the matter. Subsequent documents indicate that the Department attempted to contact eleven applicants in this case and to collect information from them. It appears that only Mr Shestakov, the eleventh applicant, was questioned. He reiterated what he had already stated about the way he had obtained copies of the protocols from members of PECs and observers. On 27 October 2014 an investigator of the District Department ruled that a criminal investigation should not be opened, finding no evidence of crimes under Articles 141, 142 and 142.1 of the Criminal Code (see paragraph 191 below). At the same time, in so far as the question concerned copies of the “original” protocols, the investigator forwarded the relevant material to the St Petersburg Department of the Interior to decide whether there had been any falsification of official documents.
On 14 November 2014 an investigator at the St Petersburg Department of the Interior decided that there was no need to open a criminal investigation into the alleged crime under Article 327 (falsification of official documents) in view of the expiry of the statutory time-limit (two years). The decision referred to the conclusions of the expert report of 22 July 2014 (see paragraph 169 above), but stated that any individuals who might have committed the act in respect of the two documents had not been identified.
According to the Government’s additional memorandum of 22 May 2015, on 12 December 2014 the St Petersburg deputy prosecutor overturned the decision of 14 November 2014 and remitted the matter to the investigating authorities. He indicated that the copies of the protocols from precinct electoral commissions had been incorrectly classified as “official documents”. On 18 February 2015 the Kirovskiy District Department of the Investigative Committee ruled that no criminal investigation should be opened in respect of the acts by Mr Davydov and others in the absence of evidence of an offence under Articles 141, 142 and 142.1 of the Criminal Code.
Elections at federal level were governed at the material time by Federal Law no. 51-FZ “on the Election of Deputies to the State Duma of the Federal Assembly of the Russian Federation” of 18 May 2005 (“the Duma Elections Act”).
In addition, elections are governed by Federal Law no. 67FZ on the basic principles of elections and referendums of 12 June 2002 (“the Basic Guarantees Act”).
Elections at city level were governed at the material time by Law no. 252-35 of St Petersburg on the Election of Deputies to the Legislative Assembly of St Petersburg of 15 June 2005 (“the St Petersburg Elections Act”). All legal instruments referred to below are cited as they stood at the relevant time.
Section 30(9) of the Basic Guarantees Act provided that observers had the right to familiarise themselves with the protocols of the electoral commissions and to obtain “certified copies of those protocols”.
Section 29(23)(g) of the Basic Guarantees Act provided that members of electoral commissions (both voting members and observers) had the right to obtain certified copies of the documents drawn up by the electoral commissions. Although election protocols were not mentioned explicitly, that provision appears to have applied to those documents too.
Sections 78-79 and of the Duma Elections Act and sections 52-53 of the St Petersburg Elections Act set out similar formal requirements as regards precinct electoral commission protocols. Such requirements included an indication of the running number of the copy; the type and date of election; an indication that it was an election protocol; the address of the precinct commission; the numerical results for each relevant field, in figures and words; the date and time, indicating hours and minutes, when the document was drawn up; the names and signatures of the chairman, deputy chairman, secretary and other members of the commission; and the stamp of the commission. If the protocol ran to more than one page, each page had to be validated by names and signatures, and contain the date and time when it had been drawn up and the precinct commission stamp.
The protocol was to be drawn up in two copies, with running numbers one and two. Immediately after the first copy had been drawn up, at the request of entitled persons (members of the commissions, observers) certified copies could be issued by the electoral commission. The issue of these copies was to be noted in a special register, which was to be signed both by the person receiving the copy and by the member of the PEC issuing it (section 79(26) of the Duma Elections Act and section 53(23) of the St Petersburg Elections Act).
The first copy of the protocol was to be signed by all members of the precinct commission. Once completed, the first copy was immediately transmitted to the corresponding TEC. All annexes, such as complaints received by the PEC, the commission’s response to such complaints, and separate opinions of its members, were attached to the first copy. The transfer of the first copy of the protocol to the TEC could be attended by any member of the precinct commission or any observer.
The second copy of the protocol remained at the precinct commission until completion of its work (for five days after the official announcement of the election results) and was accessible to authorised persons such as members of electoral commissions, observers, candidates, and representatives of political parties. Certified copies of the annexes mentioned in the preceding paragraph were attached to it. A certified copy of the second copy was displayed for public view at the precinct commission.
Section 80 of the Duma Elections Act and section 54 of the St Petersburg Elections Act set up similar procedures for the verification of election results by TECs. Thus, the members of the TEC received the results from the precinct commissions and, once compliance of the protocols with the formal requirements and the presence of the annexes had been verified, they entered the data in order to compile the results for the given electoral territory. The transfer of protocols from PECs, the tabulation of results and the drawing up of the TEC protocol with the overall results were to take place in the same room, in full view of the TEC members and observers.
The same room was to be equipped with a large board on which the results from each precinct and changes to the overall result for the territory were to be entered as soon as the protocols from the precincts arrived, indicating the time those entries had been made. The data were also to be entered into the State-run electronic database “Vybory”.
Once all data from the precincts have been compiled, the TEC drew up its own protocol, also in two running copies, containing the names and signatures of all members and the exact date and time of the signing.
Section 69(9) of the Basic Guarantees Act read as follows:
“Where the tables ... of results contain errors or discrepancies, [or] where there are doubts as to whether the protocols ... received from the lower commission have been drawn up correctly, the higher commission may order a recount [by the lower commission...] or conduct a recount itself ... The recount shall be conducted in the presence of a voting member (or members) of the higher commission by the commission which drew up and approved the protocol [that is, the lower commission] or by the commission which ordered the recount [that is, the higher commission] with mandatory notification of the non-voting members of the commission, observers, candidates and other people ... who have the right to be present at the recount.”
Sections 79(31) and 80(15-17) of the Duma Elections Act specified the method for recounts in the precinct and territorial electoral commissions. Thus, if the changes to the protocol concerned fields other than the counting of votes for the candidates or parties, the precinct commission was obliged to inform all those who had been present at the initial count, issue a protocol marked “recount” and submit it to the territorial commission, together with the original protocol. The TECs were entitled to carry out recounts of their own results and to issue “recount” protocols under similar conditions. In addition, the territorial commissions could, upon discovering errors or discrepancies, or in case of doubt as to the correctness of the precinct commissions’ results, order recounts or conduct recounts themselves, on the same conditions as in the preceding paragraph. Such recounts could be ordered either before or after formal approval of the PEC protocols.
Similar provisions were contained in the St Petersburg Act (sections 53(27) and 54(15-16)).
Section 75 of the Basic Guarantees Act provided that decisions of various electoral commissions and of their members which infringed electoral rights were subject to appeal to a court. Complaints against the CEC were to be lodged with the Supreme Court; complaints against decisions and acts of regional electoral commissions concerning elections to the federal legislature were to be lodged with the regional courts; and complaints against actions of all other electoral commissions were to be lodged with the district courts. When examining a complaint against an electoral commission’s decision, the relevant court also took into account the decisions of the lower electoral commissions if the violations alleged could have influenced the results of the elections in question (section 75 (4)). The courts’ decisions were binding and could, inter alia, invalidate the commissions’ decisions about the results and outcome of the elections. In April 2014 this section of the Basic Guarantees Act was amended so as to expressly mention the right of voters to challenge the results in the precincts where they had voted, taking into account the ruling of the Constitutional Court (see paragraphs 80-88 above).
Complaints could also be made to the higher electoral commissions, which were obliged to consider them and to take decisions; the applicants were to be informed of the decision. If a complaint was brought simultaneously before the higher commission and a court, consideration by the commission was adjourned until the end of the court proceedings (section 75(9)). The right to lodge complaints was granted to voters, candidates and their representatives, electoral groups, public bodies, observers and the commissions themselves. The commission considering the complaint should invite the complainant and a representative of the commission concerned (section 75(10) and (12)). If the commission identified breaches of law during the voting or during the drawing up of the results, it could declare the results void and, if necessary, call for a recount. The commission could act upon complaints until the results of the elections had been officially approved, following which the results could only be challenged before a competent court (section 77).
Similar provisions were contained in the St Petersburg Act (sections 61 and 63).
Article 141 of the Criminal Code of the Russian Federation (the Criminal Code) proscribed interference with the free expression of the voters’ opinion in elections and with the functioning of electoral commissions. Articles 142 and 142.1 of the Criminal Code accordingly established criminal responsibility for falsification of ballot papers and other electoral documents and for falsification of the outcome of the elections. According to authoritative comments on these provisions, while the offence of falsification of electoral documents could be committed by both electoral officials and private parties, the offence of falsifying election results could only be committed by members of electoral commissions and other persons who took part in the work of the commissions.
The applicants submitted copies of five judgments of St Petersburg district courts which followed the same pattern as experienced in the present case by them and SR. These judgments were rendered upon complaints lodged by the St Petersburg branch of SR and concerned the results of the elections of 4 December 2011 in several precincts in electoral divisions nos. 2, 4, 5, 8, 14 and 22, none of which were covered by the complaints lodged by the applicants in the present case. In all those cases the courts dismissed complaints concerning alleged discrepancies between the “original” copies of the protocols obtained by the members of the precinct commissions and the final results, in view of procedural deficiencies in these “original” copies.
The Government submitted records of over twenty criminal convictions handed down by various district courts in Russia between 2010 and 2014. Most of these convictions concerned actions of members and chairpersons of PECs who had falsified electoral papers and the results of municipal and regional elections held between 2010 and 2014. The convictions under Article 142 (falsification of ballot papers and other electoral documents) sometimes mentioned the participation of victims, namely voters whose electoral rights had been infringed; the convictions under Article 142.1 (falsification of election results) did not refer to victims.
The Government also submitted seven judgments finding, in whole or in part, the decisions of PECs and, in one case, the TEC, invalid in municipal, regional and federal elections held between 2011 and 2014. The complaints had been lodged by members of the electoral commissions, candidates and observers. In addition, in one case in 2012 a justice of the peace in St Petersburg had fined the chairman of a PEC for refusing to issue a copy of the final protocol to a member of the same commission.
In their additional observations of 22 May 2015 the Government submitted statistics on the total number of complaints on electoral matters submitted to and reviewed by courts between 2009 and 2014. This document indicates that every year 3,000 to 3,819 complaints on electoral matters were lodged with the courts. In each of those years 25% to 43% of complaints were upheld. In 2012 35% of all the electoral complaints lodged with the courts were upheld.
The relevant excerpts from the Code of Good Practice in Electoral Matters (Guidelines and Explanatory Report) (CDL-AD (2002) 23 rev), adopted by the European Commission for Democracy Through Law (“the Venice Commission”) at its 51st and 52nd sessions (5-6 July and 1819 October 2002), read as follows:
“GUIDELINES ON ELECTIONS
Principles of Europe’s electoral heritage
The five principles underlying Europe’s electoral heritage are universal, equal, free, secret and direct suffrage. Furthermore, elections must be held at regular intervals.
...
Free suffrage
...
2. Freedom of voters to express their wishes and action to combat electoral fraud
...
polling stations must include representatives of a number of parties, and the presence of observers appointed by the candidates must be permitted during voting and counting;
...
counting should preferably take place in polling stations;
counting must be transparent. Observers, candidates’ representatives and the media must be allowed to be present. These persons must also have access to the records;
results must be transmitted to the higher level in an open manner;
the state must punish any kind of electoral fraud.
...
Conditions for implementing these principles
...
Procedural guarantees
1. Organisation of elections by an impartial body
An impartial body must be in charge of applying electoral law.
Where there is no longstanding tradition of administrative authorities’ independence from those holding political power, independent, impartial electoral commissions must be set up at all levels, from the national level to polling station level.
The central electoral commission must be permanent in nature.
It should include:
Political parties must be equally represented on electoral commissions or must be able to observe the work of the impartial body. Equality may be construed strictly or on a proportional basis (see point I.2.3.b).
The bodies appointing members of electoral commissions must not be free to dismiss them at will.
Members of electoral commissions must receive standard training.
It is desirable that electoral commissions take decisions by a qualified majority or by consensus.
2. Observation of elections
Both national and international observers should be given the widest possible opportunity to participate in an election observation exercise.
Observation must not be confined to the election day itself, but must include the registration period of candidates and, if necessary, of electors, as well as the electoral campaign. It must make it possible to determine whether irregularities occurred before, during or after the elections. It must always be possible during vote counting.
The places where observers are not entitled to be present should be clearly specified by law.
Observation should cover respect by the authorities of their duty of neutrality.
3. An effective system of appeal
The appeal body in electoral matters should be either an electoral commission or a court. For elections to Parliament, an appeal to Parliament may be provided for in first instance. In any case, final appeal to a court must be possible.
The procedure must be simple and devoid of formalism, in particular concerning the admissibility of appeals.
The appeal procedure and, in particular, the powers and responsibilities of the various bodies should be clearly regulated by law, so as to avoid conflicts of jurisdiction (whether positive or negative). Neither the appellants nor the authorities should be able to choose the appeal body.
The appeal body must have authority in particular over such matters as the right to vote – including electoral registers – and eligibility, the validity of candidatures, proper observance of election campaign rules and the outcome of the elections.
The appeal body must have authority to annul elections where irregularities may have affected the outcome. It must be possible to annul the entire election or merely the results for one constituency or one polling station. In the event of annulment, a new election must be called in the area concerned.
All candidates and all voters registered in the constituency concerned must be entitled to appeal. A reasonable quorum may be imposed for appeals by voters on the results of elections.
Time-limits for lodging and deciding appeals must be short (three to five days for each at first instance).
The applicant’s right to a hearing involving both parties must be protected.
Where the appeal body is a higher electoral commission, it must be able ex officio to rectify or set aside decisions taken by lower electoral commissions.
...
EXPLANATORY REPORT
...
[I.] 3.2.2.4. Counting
The votes should preferably be counted at the polling stations themselves, rather than in special centres. The polling station staff are perfectly capable of performing this task, and this arrangement obviates the need to transport the ballot boxes and accompanying documents, thus reducing the risk of substitution.
The vote counting should be conducted in a transparent manner. It is admissible that voters registered in the polling station may attend; the presence of national or international observers should be authorised. These persons must be allowed to be present in all circumstances. There must be enough copies of the record of the proceedings to distribute to ensure that all the aforementioned persons receive one; one copy must be immediately posted on the notice-board, another kept at the polling station and a third sent to the commission or competent higher authority.
The relevant regulations should stipulate certain practical precautions as regards equipment. For example, the record of the proceedings should be completed in ballpoint pen rather than pencil, as text written in pencil can be erased.
In practice, it appears that the time needed to count the votes depends on the efficiency of the presiding officer of the polling station. These times can vary markedly, which is why a simple tried and tested procedure should be set out in the legislation or permanent regulations which appear in the training manual for polling station officials.
It is best to avoid treating too many ballot papers as invalid or spoiled. In case of doubt, an attempt should be made to ascertain the voter’s intention.
2.2.5. Transferring the results
There are two kinds of results: provisional results and final results (before all opportunities for appeal have been exhausted). The media, and indeed the entire nation, are always impatient to hear the initial provisional results. The speed with which these results are relayed will depend on the country’s communications system. The polling station’s results can be conveyed to the electoral district (for instance) by the presiding officer of the polling station, accompanied by two other members of the polling station staff representing opposing parties, in some cases under the supervision of the security forces, who will carry the records of the proceedings, the ballot box, etc.
However much care has been taken at the voting and vote-counting stages, transmitting the results is a vital operation whose importance is often overlooked; it must therefore be effected in an open manner. Transmission from the electoral district to the regional authorities and the Central Electoral Commission – or other competent higher authorities – can be done by fax. In that case, the records will be scanned and the results can be displayed as and when they come in. Television can be used to broadcast these results but once again, too much transparency can be a dangerous thing if the public is not ready for this kind of piecemeal reporting. The fact is that the initial results usually come in from the towns and cities, which do not normally or necessarily vote in the same way as rural areas. It is important therefore to make it clear to the public that the final result may be quite different from, or even completely opposite to, the provisional one, without there having been any question of foul play.
...
[II.] 3. Procedural safeguards
1. Organisation of elections by an impartial body
Only transparency, impartiality and independence from politically motivated manipulation will ensure proper administration of the election process, from the pre-election period to the end of the processing of results.
In states where the administrative authorities have a long-standing tradition of independence from the political authorities, the civil service applies electoral law without being subjected to political pressures. It is therefore both normal and acceptable for elections to be organised by administrative authorities, and supervised by the Ministry of the Interior.
However, in states with little experience of organising pluralist elections, there is too great a risk of government’s pushing the administrative authorities to do what it wants. This applies both to central and local government - even when the latter is controlled by the national opposition.
This is why independent, impartial electoral commissions must be set up from the national level to polling station level to ensure that elections are properly conducted, or at least remove serious suspicions of irregularity.
According to the reports of the Bureau of the Parliamentary Assembly of the Council of Europe on election observations, the following shortcomings concerning the electoral commissions have been noted in a number of member States: lack of transparency in the activity of the central electoral commission; variations in the interpretation of counting procedure; politically polarised election administration; controversies in appointing members of the Central Electoral Commission; commission members nominated by a state institution; the dominant position of the ruling party in the election administration.
Any central electoral commission must be permanent, as an administrative institution responsible for liaising with local authorities and the other lower-level commissions, e.g. as regards compiling and updating the electoral lists.
The composition of a central electoral commission can give rise to debate and become the key political issue in the drafting of an electoral law. Compliance with the following guidelines should facilitate maximum impartiality and competence on the part of the commission.
As a general rule, the commission should consist of:
In addition, the electoral commission may include:
Other electoral commissions operating at regional or constituency level should have a similar composition to that of the central electoral commission. Constituency commissions play an important role in uninominal voting systems because they determine the winner in general elections. Regional commissions also play a major role in relaying the results to the central electoral commission.
2. Observation of elections
Observation of elections plays an important role as it provides evidence of whether the electoral process has been regular or not.
There are three different types of observer: partisan national observers, non-partisan national observers and international (non-partisan) observers. In practice the distinction between the first two categories is not always obvious. This is why it is best to make the observation procedure as broad as possible at both the national and the international level.
Observation is not confined to the actual polling day but includes ascertaining whether any irregularities have occurred in advance of the elections (e.g. by improper maintenance of electoral lists, obstacles to the registration of candidates, restrictions on freedom of expression, and violations of rules on access to the media or on public funding of electoral campaigns), during the elections (e.g. through pressure exerted on electors, multiple voting, violation of voting secrecy, etc.) or after polling (especially during the vote counting and announcement of the results). Observation should focus particularly on the authorities’ regard for their duty of neutrality.
...
The law must be very clear as to what sites observers are not entitled to visit, so that their activities are not excessively hampered. For example, an act authorising observers to visit only sites where the election (or voting) takes place could be construed by certain polling stations in an unduly narrow manner.
3. An effective system of appeal
If the electoral law provisions are to be more than just words on a page, failure to comply with the electoral law must be open to challenge before an appeal body. This applies in particular to the election results: individual citizens may challenge them on the grounds of irregularities in the voting procedures. It also applies to decisions taken before the elections, especially in connection with the right to vote, electoral registers and standing for election, the validity of candidatures, compliance with the rules governing the electoral campaign and access to the media or to party funding.
There are two possible solutions:
There is much to be said for this latter system in that the commissions are highly specialised whereas the courts tend to be less experienced with regard to electoral issues. As a precautionary measure, however, it is desirable that there should be some form of judicial supervision in place, making the higher commission the first appeal level and the competent court the second.
Appeal proceedings should be as brief as possible, in any case concerning decisions to be taken before the election. On this point, two pitfalls must be avoided: first, that appeal proceedings retard the electoral process, and second, that, due to their lack of suspensive effect, decisions on appeals which could have been taken before, are taken after the elections. In addition, decisions on the results of elections must also not take too long, especially where the political climate is tense. This means both that the time limits for appeals must be very short and that the appeal body must make its ruling as quickly as possible. Time limits must, however, be long enough to make an appeal possible, to guarantee the exercise of rights of defence and a reflected decision. A time limit of three to five days at first instance (both for lodging appeals and making rulings) seems reasonable for decisions to be taken before the elections. It is, however, permissible to grant a little more time to Supreme and Constitutional Courts for their rulings.
The procedure must also be simple, and providing voters with special appeal forms helps to make it so. It is necessary to eliminate formalism, and so avoid decisions of inadmissibility, especially in politically sensitive cases.
It is also vital that the appeal procedure, and especially the powers and responsibilities of the various bodies involved in it, should be clearly regulated by law, so as to avoid any positive or negative conflicts of jurisdiction. Neither the appellants nor the authorities should be able to choose the appeal body. The risk that successive bodies will refuse to give a decision is seriously increased where it is theoretically possible to appeal to either the courts or an electoral commission, or where the powers of different courts – e.g. the ordinary courts and the constitutional court – are not clearly differentiated.
...
Standing in such appeals must be granted as widely as possible. It must be open to every elector in the constituency and to every candidate standing for election there to lodge an appeal. A reasonable quorum may, however, be imposed for appeals by voters on the results of elections.
The appeal procedure should be of a judicial nature, in the sense that the right of the appellants to proceedings in which both parties are heard should be safeguarded.
The powers of appeal bodies are important too. They should have authority to annul elections, if irregularities may have influenced the outcome, i.e. affected the distribution of seats. This is the general principle, but it should be open to adjustment, i.e. annulment should not necessarily affect the whole country or constituency – indeed, it should be possible to annul the results of just one polling station. This makes it possible to avoid the two extremes – annulling an entire election, although irregularities affect a small area only, and refusing to annul, because the area affected is too small. In zones where the results have been annulled, the elections must be repeated.
Where higher-level commissions are appeal bodies, they should be able to rectify or annul ex officio the decisions of lower electoral commissions.”
The OSCE summarised its findings as follows:
“The preparations for the 4 December elections were technically well-administered across the country, but the elections were marked by the convergence of the state and the governing party. Although seven parties ran, the prior denial of registration to certain political parties narrowed political competition. The contest was also slanted in favour of the ruling party. This was evidenced by the lack of independence of the election administration, the partiality of most media, and the undue interference of state authorities at different levels. This did not provide the necessary conditions for fair electoral competition. Despite the lack of a level playing field, voters took advantage of their right to express their choice.
During voting, election officials were observed to be dedicated and experienced and procedures were followed overall. However, the quality of the process deteriorated considerably during the count, which was characterized by frequent procedural violations and instances of apparent manipulation, including several serious indications of ballot box stuffing. Result protocols were not publicly displayed in more than one-third of polling stations observed. Throughout election day, observers also reported a number of instances of obstruction to their activities, in particular during count and tabulation.
The final election results were announced by the CEC on 9 December. A number of mass demonstrations took place across the country, linked to allegations of election day fraud that received broad publicity, including on the Internet.
The legal framework is comprehensive and provides an adequate basis for the conduct of elections. However, structurally, the legal framework is overly complex and open to interpretation, which led to its inconsistent application by various stakeholders, often in favour of one party over the others. Laws guaranteeing the right to peaceful assembly were in some cases applied restrictively, undermining contestants’ rights. Numerous amendments to the legal framework had been adopted since the previous elections. A number of recent changes improved certain elements of the electoral process, although the reduction of the parliamentary threshold to five per cent did not apply in these elections.
The CEC adopted detailed instructions to facilitate preparations for the elections. It held regular sessions and took most decisions unanimously, without debate. The process of adjudication of complaints by the CEC lacked transparency and did not afford the contestants effective and timely redress. The CEC has not complied with the legal requirement that all complaints must be acted upon and responded to in writing. Representatives of most political parties expressed a high degree of distrust in the impartiality of election commissions at all levels and questioned their independence from various state administration bodies.”
More specifically, the OSCE reported on vote counting and appeals:
“XIV. ELECTION DAY
The voting process was assessed positively in 93 per cent of polling stations observed and procedures were followed, overall. ...
Party representatives were present in almost all polling stations visited. The majority of them were nominated by ER (85 per cent of visits), KPRF (75 per cent) and SR (59 per cent). ...
The vote count was assessed as bad or very bad in every third polling station observed. This was mainly due to a poor organization, lack of transparency and serious departures from the counting procedures outlined by the CEC. Signatures of voters who voted were not counted in 42 polling stations and in 38 polling stations, the number of ballots issued for ‘mobile voting’ was not recorded. In almost half of the observed counts, marked ballots were not shown to those present. ...
Twelve cases of extended breaks in the counting process were reported. In some instances, PECs interrupted the count, at times taking voting material out of sight of observers. Observers were restricted in their observation in 20 polling stations. In 7, they were expelled from polling stations during the count. Observers did not receive copies of result protocols in 21 polling stations observed and in almost half of polling stations visited, signed protocols were not posted publicly.
The tabulation was assessed negatively in 17 of the observed TECs. In 41 cases, observers reported that the facilities for the reception and recording of results were inadequate. The organisation of data collection was evaluated as bad or very bad in 11 observer reports. Insufficient transparency of the process was noted in 24 cases. The submitted PEC protocols were not always filled in. They were also not signed with a pen in 21 cases and did not contain all required figures in 32 cases. In addition, some procedural irregularities were noted, such as a failure to enter the data from PEC protocols into TEC summary tables in 10 of the observed TECs.
...
ANNOUNCEMENT OF RESULTS
... The CEC announced preliminary results on the day after the elections. The final results were approved on 9 December. The CEC posted tables with summaries of final results from all election commissions on its website, which enhanced the transparency and made independent verification by stakeholders possible. The reported turnout was 60.21 per cent. ER received 49.32 per cent of the votes and won 238 seats, KPRF – 19.19 per cent and 92 seats, Just Russia [SR] – 13.24 per cent and 64 seats, and LDPR – 11.67 per cent and 56 seats. Other lists did not surpass the thresholds; YA [Yabloko], which received 3.43 per cent of the votes however, will now qualify for state funding.
One CEC member objected to the official final results announced and submitted a dissenting opinion. He stated that elections did not allow for the free expression of the will of voters and were characterized by an unequal treatment of contestants by different government bodies in favour of ER. He also highlighted that there were numerous violations of the law during the counting process. Finally, he stated that, despite repeated requests, he was not given copies of all 33 dissenting opinions attached to the summary protocols of SECs.
One other non-voting CEC member from KPRF suggested that, given the number of reported violations during these elections, the CEC adopt a resolution to dismiss the CEC chairperson. The suggestion was rejected. LDPR and SR representatives at the CEC also severely criticized the conduct of State Duma elections. ”