The case originated in two applications (nos. 4678/07 and 50591/12) against Serbia lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Serbian national, Ms Sofija Tešić (“the applicant”), on 29 December 2006 and 28 May 2012 respectively.
The applicant was represented by Mr M. Dodig, a lawyer practising in Temerin. The Serbian Government (“the Government”) were initially represented by their former Agent, Mr S. Carić, and subsequently by their current Agent, Ms Vanja Rodić.
Applications nos. 4678/07 and 50591/12 concern the criminal and civil defamation proceedings, respectively, brought against the applicant by her former lawyer and the applicant’s various complaints in this connection.
On 11 December 2012 the applications were communicated to the Government.
The applicant was born in 1934 and lives in Ledinci. In December 2006 her pension was 6,568.30 Serbian Dinars (“RSD”), i.e. approximately 80 Euros (“EUR”).
The relevant facts of the case, as submitted by the parties, may be summarised as follows.
On 8 April 2005 the Novi Sad Municipal Court, acting on the basis of a private criminal action (privatna krivična tužba) filed on 10 March 2003, found the applicant guilty of criminal defamation (kleveta) and sentenced her to six months’ imprisonment, suspended for a period of two years (uslovna osuda; see paragraph 35 below). Ms SN, a journalist, was also found guilty of the same offence and sentenced identically.
The Municipal Court noted, inter alia, that on 12 December 2002 Dnevnik, a Novi Sad daily newspaper, had published an article, prepared by Ms SN and based on the information provided by the applicant, to the effect that the latter’s lawyer, Mr NB, had deliberately failed to represent her properly in a pending civil case. The article maintained that this was subsequently confirmed by the Novi Sad Police Department. The Municipal Court described the applicant’s and article’s assertions as lacking any factual basis and being aimed solely at harming the honour and reputation of Mr NB, a highly respected member of the Novi Sad legal community and a former judge.
On 11 January 2006 the Novi Sad District Court upheld this judgment on appeal and endorsed its reasoning. The applicant received the District Court’s decision on 19 July 2006.
On 16 August 2006 the applicant filed a request for the reopening of these proceedings.
Following two remittals, on 29 July 2009 the Municipal Court accepted the applicant’s motion and reopened the case. The applicant personally and a number of witnesses were reheard and numerous documents/files were re-examined, but ultimately, on 25 March 2011, both the original conviction and the sentence imposed were reaffirmed in their entirety. The Municipal Court’s reasoning likewise remained the same. It clarified, however, that, whilst the police had indeed filed a criminal complaint against Mr NB on 15 May 2002, by 5 July 2002 the Novi Sad Municipal Public Prosecutor’s Office had informed the applicant of its formal rejection based on the applicable statute of limitation. The applicant had thereafter attempted to take over the prosecution of the case in the capacity of a subsidiary prosecutor, but this had ultimately been rejected by the courts by 30 September 2004.
On 29 November 2011 the Novi Sad Appeals Court upheld the Municipal Court’s judgment of 25 March 2011. The applicant was served with the Appeals Court’s decision on 21 December 2011.
On 19 January 2012 the applicant filed a further appeal with the Constitutional Court, complaining, inter alia, about the outcome, fairness and length of the criminal proceedings, as well as the alleged breach of her freedom of expression. This appeal is still pending.
On 19 December 2006 Mr NB filed a separate civil claim for damages with the Novi Sad Municipal Court, alleging that he had suffered mental anguish due to the publication of the impugned article.
On 31 January 2007 the Municipal Court ruled partly in favour of Mr NB and ordered the applicant to pay RSD 300,000 in compensation, together with default interest, plus costs in the amount of RSD 94,120, i.e. approximately EUR 4,900 Euros in all.
In its reasoning the Municipal Court found that: (a) the applicant had already been convicted of defamation within the criminal proceedings (see paragraph 40 below); (b) having examined Mr NB’s professional conduct, her allegations had clearly lacked any factual basis; and (c) this had offended the honour, reputation and dignity of Mr NB and had caused him profound mental anguish (see paragraph 38 below).
On 16 April 2009 the District Court in Novi Sad rejected the applicant’s appeal, and in so doing endorsed the reasons given at first instance. The applicant received the District Court’s decision on 30 April 2009.
The applicant could not file an appeal on points of law, revizija, with the Supreme Court in view of the amount of damages awarded.
On 29 May 2009 the applicant thus filed an appeal with the Constitutional Court. This appeal was, effectively, supplemented by memorials of 21 November 2009, 27 June 2011 and 25 November 2011. The applicant complained about the breach of her right to freedom of expression, as well as the procedural fairness. Concerning the former she specifically referred to the disproportionate nature of the damages awarded, and cited the relevant Strasbourg case-law (such as, for example, Tolstoy Miloslavsky v. the United Kingdom, 13 July 1995, Series A no. 316B; and Filipović v. Serbia, no. 27935/05, 20 November 2007). The applicant, lastly, complained about the consequent danger to her life and her health, as described at paragraphs 30 and 31 below.
On 6 August 2009 the applicant requested that the Constitutional Court order the suspension of the civil enforcement proceedings brought against her (see paragraphs 25-29 below).
On 9 December 2009 the Municipal Court rejected the applicant’s motion for the reopening of the civil proceedings, and on 7 May 2010 the Novi Sad High Court upheld this decision on appeal.
On 27 April 2011 the applicant again requested that the Constitutional Court order the suspension of the said enforcement proceedings.
On 15 December 2011 the Constitutional Court rejected the constitutional appeal on its merits, stating, inter alia, that the impugned decisions had been adopted in accordance with the law, that they had been well-reasoned, and that it was not its function to assess whether the amount of compensation which had been awarded was disproportionate. The Constitutional Court made no mention of the applicant’s complaint concerning her medical situation.
The applicant was apparently informed of this decision in the Constitutional Court’s letter of 21 December 2011, and received it by 23 April 2012 at the latest.
On 13 July 2009 Mr NB filed a motion with the Novi Sad Municipal Court, seeking enforcement of its judgment dated 31 January 2007.
On 14 July 2009 the Municipal Court issued an enforcement order whereby two thirds of the applicant’s pension were to be transferred to the creditor’s bank account each month, until the sums awarded to the latter have been paid in full (see paragraphs 41-43 below).
The said deductions to the applicant’s monthly income began as of 8 August 2009.
In May 2012 the applicant’s monthly pension was RSD 19,707, approximately EUR 170. After deductions, the applicant was left with approximately EUR 60 on which to live.
By 30 June 2013 the applicant had paid a total of RSD 496,471.10, i.e. approximately EUR 4,350. However, given the accrued and future interest, she would have to continue with the payments for approximately another two years (see paragraphs 44-50 below).
The applicant suffered from a number of diseases including cataracts, progressive ocular hypertension, which had allegedly caused a total loss of vision in her left eye, angina pectoris, and clinical depression. She had also had a pacemaker installed several years ago, had suffered a stroke and was in need of hip surgery.
The applicant maintained that she needed a minimum of RSD 5,000 monthly for her medication, i.e. approximately EUR 44, but that she could no longer afford to buy it.
On 21 September 2006, concerning the same article published on 12 December 2002, the Novi Sad Municipal Court ruled in favour of Mr NB and ordered Ms SN, Dnevnik, and the Autonomous Province of Vojvodina (as the said newspaper’s founder) jointly to pay RSD 300,000 in compensation for the non-pecuniary damage suffered, together with default interest, plus costs in the amount of RSD 55,600, i.e. approximately EUR 4,120 in all. On 13 December 2006 this judgment was upheld by the Novi Sad District Court on appeal.
The applicant maintained that on 13 April 2013 her gas supply had been disconnected in view of her continuing inability to pay her utilities.
The relevant provisions of this Code read as follows:
“Whoever, in relation to another, asserts or disseminates a falsehood which can damage his [or her] honour or reputation shall be fined or punished by imprisonment not exceeding six months.
If an act described in [the above] paragraph has been committed through the press, via radio or television ... [or otherwise through the mass media] ... or at a public meeting, the perpetrator shall be punished by imprisonment not exceeding one year. ...
If the defendant proves his [or her] claims to be true or if he [or she] proves that there were reasonable grounds to believe in the veracity of the claims which he [or she] had made or disseminated, he [or she] shall not be punished for defamation, but may be punished for the offence of insult ... or the offence of reproaching someone for the commission of a criminal offence...
Whoever, in relation to another, falsely claims or disseminates claims to the effect that he [or she] has committed a crime prosecuted ex officio, shall be punished for defamation even if there were reasonable grounds to believe in their veracity, unless such claims have been made or disseminated pursuant to Article 96 § 2 of this Code. The veracity of the claim that someone has committed a crime prosecuted ex officio may be proved only by means of a final court judgment and through other means of proof only if criminal prosecution or a trial are not possible or are legally precluded.”
“... [No one] ... shall ... be punished for insulting another person if he [or she] so does in a scientific, literary or artistic work, a serious critique, in the performance of his [or her] official duties, his [or her] journalistic profession, as part of a political or other social activity or in defence of a right or of a justified interest, if from the manner of his [or her] expression or other circumstances it transpires that there was no [underlying] intent to disparage.
In situations referred to above, ... [the defendant] ... shall not be punished for claiming or disseminating claims that another person has committed a criminal offence prosecuted ex officio, even though there is no final judgment to that effect ... , if he [or she] proves that there were reasonable grounds to believe in the veracity of ... [those claims] ...”
The relevant provisions of this Code read as follows:
“It is the criminal legislation which was in force at the time of commission of the crime in question that shall be applied to the perpetrator thereof.
If the criminal legislation has been amended once or on several occasions thereafter, the legislation which is more favourable for the perpetrator shall be applied.”
“... [T]he purpose of a suspended sentence ... is that punishment ... for socially less dangerous acts not be imposed ... when ... it can be expected that an admonition with a threat of punishment (suspended sentence) ... will ... [be sufficient to deter the offender] ... from committing any [other] criminal acts.”
“In handing down a suspended sentence, the court shall impose punishment on the person who had committed a criminal act and at the same time order that this punishment shall not be enforced if the convicted person does not commit another criminal act for a ... [specified] ... period of time which cannot be less than one or more than five years in all (period of suspension) ...”
“In deciding whether to impose a suspended sentence, the court shall take into account the purpose of [this] sentence, the personality of the offender, his [or her] conduct prior to and following the commission of the criminal act, the degree of his [or her] criminal liability, as well as other circumstances under which the act has been committed.”
“The court shall revoke the suspended sentence if, during the period of suspension, the convicted person commits one or more criminal acts for which he or she is sentenced to imprisonment for a term of or exceeding two years.
If, during the period of suspension, the convicted person commits one or more criminal acts and is sentenced to imprisonment for a term of less than two years or to a fine, the court shall, upon consideration of all the circumstances ... including the similarity of the crimes committed ... decide whether to revoke the suspended sentence ...”
“A suspended sentence shall be expunged one year following the date of expiry of the period of suspension, if the convicted person does not commit another criminal act during this time.”
“When a conviction has been expunged, information about the conviction may ... be given ... [only] ... to the courts, the public prosecution service and the police in connection with an ongoing criminal case against the person ... [concerned] ... ”
In 2005 the Serbian Parliament enacted a new Criminal Code (Krivični zakonik). It was published in OG RS no. 85/05 and entered into force on 1 January 2006, thus repealing the above-mentioned criminal legislation. The new Code provided for the offence of criminal defamation, in Article 171, but envisaged that only a fine, not a prison term, could be imposed on the perpetrators thereof.
The Criminal Code 2005 was amended on four occasions thereafter. Ultimately, the amendments adopted in 2012, which were published in OG RS no. 121/12 and entered into force on 1 January 2013, repealed Article 171 of the Criminal Code 2005. Criminal defamation thereby ceased to be a criminal offence in the Serbian legal system.
Under Articles 199 and 200, inter alia, anyone who has suffered mental anguish as a consequence of a breach of his or her honour or reputation may, depending on its duration and intensity, sue for financial compensation before the civil courts and, in addition, request other forms of redress “which may be capable” of affording adequate non-pecuniary satisfaction.
Article 200 § 2 provides, inter alia, that when deciding on the exact amount of compensation to be awarded, the courts must take into account all of the relevant circumstances. There is also long-standing domestic case-law to the effect that the courts must be vigilant not to give in to any lucrative animus when it comes to compensation claims filed in respect of alleged breaches of one’s reputation (see, for example, the decision of the Supreme Court of Yugoslavia, Rev. 277/66).
Article 13 provides that a civil court is bound by a final decision of a criminal court in respect of whether a crime was committed, as well as concerning the criminal liability of the person convicted. An acquittal, however, does not rule out a civil suit for damages since the conditions for criminal and civil liability are different (see Komentar Zakona o parničnom postupku, Mr Svetislav R. Vuković, Poslovni biro, Belgrade, 2004, p. 18).
Article 156 § 1 provides, inter alia, that, as part of the enforcement procedure, up to two thirds of a debtor’s pension may be withheld.
Article 148 § 1 of this Act, in its relevant part, corresponds to the substance of Article 156 § 1 of the Enforcement Procedure Act 2004.
According to Article 363, the Enforcement Procedure Act 2011 entered into force on 18 September 2011, while pursuant to Article 358 § 1 all pending enforcement proceedings shall be completed on the basis of this new Act.
Article 1 provides that statutory interest shall be paid as of the date of maturity of a recognised monetary claim until the date of its settlement.
Article 2 states that such interest shall be calculated on the basis of the official consumer price index plus another 0.5% monthly.
Article 3 § 1 sets out the exact method of calculating the interest in question.
Based on this decision and as of 27 July 2012, the Constitutional Court repealed the method of calculating interest as set out in Article 3 § 1 of the Statutory Interest Act 2001.
Article 2 provides that statutory interest shall be paid as of the date of maturity of a recognised monetary claim until the date of its settlement.
Article 3 states that such interest shall be calculated annually based on the Serbian National Bank’s reference interest rate and increased by eight percentage points.
This act entered into force on 25 December 2012 and thereby repealed the Statutory Interest Act 2001.