The case originated in an application (no. 42461/13) against the Republic of Hungary lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by four Hungarian nationals, Mr Gergely Karácsony, Mr Péter Szilágyi, Mr Dávid Dorosz and Ms Rebeka Katalin Szabó (“the applicants”), on 14 June 2013.
The applicants were represented by Mr D. Karsai, a lawyer practising in Budapest. The Hungarian Government (“the Government”) were represented by Mr Z. Tallódi, Agent, Ministry of Public Administration and Justice.
The applicants, Members of Parliament at the material time, alleged that the decisions to fine them for showing billboards during a plenary vote in Parliament had violated their right to freedom of expression under Article 10 of the Convention.
On 7 November 2013 the application was communicated to the Government.
The applicants were born in 1975, 1981, 1985 and 1977 respectively and live in Budapest.
At the material time, the applicants were members of the Hungarian Parliament and the opposition party Párbeszéd Magyarországért. Mr Szilágyi was notary of Parliament.
At a plenary session on 30 April 2013, during a pre-agenda speech, Mr Karácsony and Mr Szilágyi showed a billboard in the session hall displaying the text “FIDESZ [the party on government]. You steal, you cheat, and you lie.”
On the same day, Mr Szilágyi made a speech in the general debate on Bill no. T/10881 amending Certain Smoking-related Acts, accusing the government parties of corruption.
On 6 May 2013 the Speaker presented a proposal to fine Mr Karácsony 50,000 Hungarian forints (HUF) (approximately 170 euros (EUR)) and Mr Szilágyi HUF 185,520 (approximately EUR 600) for having gravely disrupted the plenary proceedings, in application of section 49(4) of Act no. XXXVI of 2012 on Parliament.
The Speaker proposed that the maximum fine as regards Mr Szilágyi (a third of his monthly remuneration) be applied, since he was an elected official of Parliament, not just an ordinary MP.
A decision approving the proposal of the Speaker was adopted by the plenary on 13 May 2013, without a debate.
On 21 May 2013 during the final vote on Bill no. T/10881 Mr Dorosz and Ms Szabó presented a billboard with the text “Here Operates the National Tobacco Mafia”.
On 27 May 2013 the Speaker submitted a proposal to fine them HUF 70,000 (EUR 240) each, for gravely disrupting the plenary proceedings, in application of section 49(4) of Act no. XXXVI of 2012 on Parliament. The proposal stated that an increased fine was necessary, since similar, seriously disruptive conducts had occurred before.
The plenary adopted the proposal on 27 May 2013 without a debate.
A constitutional complaint was filed, concerning a sanction for disruptive conduct, by MP E.N., a member of the opposition party Jobbik, and rejected by the Constitutional Court on 4 November 2013 (decision nos. 3206/2013. (XI.18.) AB and 3207/2013. (XI.18.) AB, see paragraph 16 below).
The Constitutional Court found that MP E.N. had been fined under sections 48(3) and (6), 50(1) and 52(2) – rather than section 49(4) – of Act no. XXXVI of 2012 on Parliament. It held in particular that the restrictions imposed on him for conduct falling under the above provisions – that is, “gravely offensive expression” – were in compliance with the Fundamental Law. His complaint in respect of section 49(4) was rejected because this provision, concerning “gravely offensive conduct”, was not applicable in that case.
The Constitutional Court went on to observe that there was no remedy available to that complainant against the measure.
Lastly, the Constitutional Court held that parliamentary disciplinary law concerned Parliament’s interior business and the MPs’ conduct as parliamentarians, rather than citizens’ rights or obligations; and that therefore no requirement of a remedy against a parliamentary disciplinary measure could be deduced from Article XXVIII(7) of the Fundamental Law.
The Fundamental Law of Hungary provides as relevant:
“(1) Everyone shall have the right to freedom of speech.
(2) Hungary shall recognise and protect the freedom and diversity of the press, and shall ensure the conditions for free dissemination of information necessary for the formation of democratic public opinion.”
“(7) Everyone shall have the right to seek legal remedy against any court, authority or other administrative decision which violates his or her rights or legitimate interests.”
“(7) Parliament shall establish the rules of its operation and the order of its debates in the provisions of the Rules of Parliament (Házszabály) adopted with the votes of two-thirds of the Members of Parliament present. In order to ensure undisturbed operation of Parliament and to preserve its dignity, the Speaker shall exercise policing and disciplinary powers as laid down in the Rules of Parliament.
(8) The provisions ensuring the regular sessions of Parliament shall be laid down in a cardinal Act.”
“(2) Members of Parliament may address interpellations or questions to the Government or any of its members about any matter within their functions.”
Act no. XXXVI of 2012 on Parliament (“Ogytv.”) provides as follows:
“The Speaker shall: ...
(2) (f) open the sessions, preside over the sessions impartially, and close them; call Members of Parliament to speak, see to it that the Rules of Parliament are observed, announce the results of the voting and preserve order and decorum during the sessions.”
Section 46
“(1) The chair of the session shall call any Members who digress from the point obviously without any reason during their speech, or pointlessly repeat their own or other speakers’ speeches during the same debate to get to the point, and simultaneously warn him of the consequences of non-compliance.
(2) The chair of the session may withdraw the right of Members to speak if during their speech they continue to behave in the way specified under paragraph (1) after being warned for the second time.”
Section 47
“The chair of the session may withdraw speakers the right to speak, giving the reason for the denial, if they have used the time allotted to them or their parliamentary group.”
“(2) A Member may not be denied the right to speak if the chair of the session has not warned him/her of the consequences of the calls.
(3) Anyone who has been denied the right to speak pursuant to paragraph (1), section 46 (2) or section 48 (2) may not speak again during the same session day on the same matter.
(4) If a Member’s conduct is gravely offensive to the authority or order of Parliament, or violates the provisions of the Rules of Parliament on the order of debate or voting, then the chair of the session may propose the exclusion of the Member for the remainder of the session day without calling him/her to order or warning, and the imposition of a fine on him/her. The proposal shall contain the reason of the measure and ... the provision of Rules of Parliament violated.
...
(7) The chair of the session, in the absence of a proposal on any sanction referred to in paragraph (4), shall be entitled to propose the imposition of a fine on the Member within five days of him/her engaging in a conduct specified in paragraph (4).
(8) Parliament shall decide on the proposal on the imposition of a fine referred to in paragraphs (4) and (7) during the session following the proposal, without a debate. The sum of the fine may not exceed one third of the Member’s monthly remuneration.”
“If disorderly conduct occurs during the session of Parliament making it impossible to continue the proceedings, the chair of the session may suspend the session for a definite period of time or close it. When the session is closed, the chair of the session shall convene a new session. If the chair of the session is unable to announce his/her decision, he/she shall leave the chair’s seat, which interrupts the session. When the session is interrupted, it may only continue if it is reconvened by the chair of the session.”
The relevant general Resolutions of the Parliamentary Committee responsible for the interpretation of the Rules of Parliament provide as follows:
“On the basis of section 2(2) f) of the Act on Parliament, the chair of the session shall be responsible for ensuring the smooth running of the sessions of Parliament. Within the framework of the Act on Parliament, the chair of the session shall be entitled to discretion in communication and measures necessary for maintaining the order of the session.”
“The exercise of the Speaker’s right to reject a motion, provided for in section 97 (4) of the Rules of Parliament, shall be supported by the fact that the motion is not suitable for debate or decision making. Having a debate on an obviously frivolous and offensive motion is incompatible with the authority of Parliament. It is the Speaker’s right and obligation, pursuant to his/her duty specified in section 2 (1) of the Act on Parliament, to reject such motions.”
The Constitutional Court examined Act no. XXXVI of 2012 in decision nos. 3206/2013. (XI.18.) AB and 3207/2013. (XI.18.) AB. It recalled that compared to other individuals, the limits of freedom of expression are wider in the case of MPs, as they are protected by parliamentary immunity. Nonetheless, to counterbalance this broad immunity, some of their conduct is subjected to disciplinary rules, for example in cases where they violate the rights and interests of a person or, in particular, of a national, ethnical, racial or religious group. While such conduct does not attain a level of severity entailing criminal responsibility or civil law sanctions, it nevertheless necessitates remedies. Thus, the Speaker should have the necessary means to prevent abuses of freedom of expression by MPs. Furthermore, the orderly and proper conduct of committee sittings was a prerequisite for the implementation of Parliament’s tasks; and the protection of the latter’s authority could, therefore, serve as a limit on MPs’ right to free speech. According to the Constitutional Court’s finding, the impugned statutory provisions prescribed a gradual application of disciplinary sanctions, ensuring that they were proportionate to the gravity of the disciplinary misdemeanour in that the most severe sanctions, the exclusion of an MP or the reduction of his or her monthly remuneration, could only be imposed for “particularly offensive expressions” or “particularly disturbing conduct”. The Constitutional Court pointed out that parliamentary disciplinary law governs Parliament’s internal business and primarily regulates MPs’ conduct as parliamentarians, as opposed to the rights and obligations of citizens; hence, no obligation to secure a legal remedy against such decisions can be inferred from Article XXVIII(7) of the Fundamental Law (section 44 of decision no. 3206/2013. (XI.18.) AB).
In his dissenting opinion, the President of the Constitutional Court observed that the restrictions on MPs’ parliamentary speech for using particularly offensive expressions or disturbing conduct could only be considered proportionate to the protection of the dignity of Parliament if the MP concerned had previously been called to order and warned about the consequences of his acts. He argued that in the absence of such a preliminary notice, the measures were disproportionate and contrary to the Fundamental Law.
Rule 22 of the Rules of Procedure of the Assembly (Resolution 1202 (1999) adopted on 4 November 1999 with subsequent modifications of the Rules of Procedure) concerning maintenance of order reads as follows:
“21.1. The President shall call to order any member of the Assembly who causes a disturbance during proceedings.
2 If the offence is repeated, the President shall again call the member to order, and this shall be recorded in the report of the debates.
3 In the event of a further offence, the President shall direct the offender to resume his or her seat or may exclude him or her from the Chamber for the remainder of the session.”
“Members’ conduct shall be characterised by mutual respect, be based on the values and principles laid down in the basic texts on which the European Union is founded, respect the dignity of Parliament and not compromise the smooth conduct of parliamentary business or disturb the peace and quiet of any of Parliament’s premises. Members shall comply with Parliament’s rules on the treatment of confidential information. Failure to comply with those standards and rules may lead to the application of measures in accordance with Rules 152, 153 and 154.”
“1. The President shall call to order any Member who disrupts the smooth conduct of the proceedings or whose conduct fails to comply with the relevant provisions of Rule 9.
Should the offence be repeated, the President shall again call the Member to order, and the fact shall be recorded in the minutes.
Should the disturbance continue, or if a further offence is committed, the offender may be denied the right to speak and may be excluded from the Chamber by the President for the remainder of the session. The President may also resort to the latter measure immediately and without a second call to order in cases of exceptional seriousness. The Secretary-General shall, without delay, see to it that such disciplinary measures are carried out, with the assistance of the ushers and, if necessary, of Parliament’s Security Service.
Should disturbances threaten to obstruct the business of the House, the President shall close or suspend the session for a specific period to restore order. If the President cannot make himself heard, he shall leave the chair; this shall have the effect of suspending the session. The President shall reconvene the session.
The powers provided for in paragraphs 1 to 4 shall be vested, mutatis mutandis, in the presiding officers of bodies, committees and delegations as provided for in the Rules of Procedure.
Where appropriate, and bearing in mind the seriousness of the breach of the Members’ standards of conduct, the Member in the Chair may, no later than the following part-session or the following meeting of the body, committee or delegation concerned, ask the President to apply Rule 153.”
“1. In exceptionally serious cases of disorder or disruption of Parliament in violation of the principles laid down in Rule 9, the President, after hearing the Member concerned, shall adopt a reasoned decision laying down the appropriate penalty, which he shall notify to the Member concerned and to the presiding officers of the bodies, committees and delegations on which the Member serves, before announcing it to plenary.
When assessing the conduct observed, account shall be taken of its exceptional, recurrent or permanent nature and of its seriousness, on the basis of the guidelines annexed to these Rules of Procedure.
The penalty may consist of one or more of the following measures:
(a) a reprimand;
(b) forfeiture of entitlement to the daily subsistence allowance for a period of between two and ten days;
(c) without prejudice to the right to vote in plenary, and subject, in this instance, to strict compliance with the Members’ standards of conduct, temporary suspension from participation in all or some of the activities of Parliament for a period of between two and ten consecutive days on which Parliament or any of its bodies, committees or delegations meet;
(d) submission to the Conference of Presidents, in accordance with Rule 19, of a proposal for the Member’s suspension or removal from one or more of the offices held by the Member in Parliament.”
“The Member concerned may lodge an internal appeal with the Bureau within two weeks of notification of the penalty imposed by the President. Such an appeal shall have the effect of suspending the application of that penalty. The Bureau may, not later than four weeks after the lodging of the appeal, annul, confirm or reduce the penalty imposed, without prejudice to the external rights of appeal open to the Member concerned. Should the Bureau fail to take a decision within the time limit laid down, the penalty shall be declared null and void.”
“1. A distinction should be drawn between visual actions, which may be tolerated provided they are not offensive and/or defamatory, remain within reasonable bounds and do not lead to conflict, and those which actively disrupt any parliamentary activity whatsoever.
Members shall be held responsible for any failure by persons whom they employ or for whom they arrange access to Parliament to comply on Parliament’s premises with the standards of conduct applicable to Members. The President or his representatives may exercise disciplinary powers over such persons and any other outside person present on Parliament’s premises.”
“The Court of Justice of the European Union shall review the legality of legislative acts, of acts of the Council, of the Commission and of the European Central Bank, other than recommendations and opinions, and of acts of the European Parliament and of the European Council intended to produce legal effects vis-à-vis third parties. It shall also review the legality of acts of bodies, offices or agencies of the Union intended to produce legal effects vis-à-vis third parties.
...
Any natural or legal person may, under the conditions laid down in the first and second paragraphs, institute proceedings against an act addressed to that person or which is of direct and individual concern to them, and against a regulatory act which is of direct concern to them and does not entail implementing measures.
Acts setting up bodies, offices and agencies of the Union may lay down specific conditions and arrangements concerning actions brought by natural or legal persons against acts of these bodies, offices or agencies intended to produce legal effects in relation to them.”
An action for annulment concerning, inter alia, the imposition of the penalty of forfeiture of entitlement to the daily subsistence allowance for a period of 10 days on an MP was brought before the Order of the General Court (Third Chamber) of the European Court of Justice. On 5 September 2012 the court dismissed the action, inter alia, because it was submitted too late. (Case of T-564/11 Nigel Paul Farage v. European Parliament and Jerzy Buzek).
The Government submitted information concerning parliamentary practices on fines and other sanctions applicable for breach of parliamentary rules in various Member States. These submissions were not contested by the applicants and are as follows.
According to the Government, all Council of Europe Member States make use of means available under disciplinary law in order to secure undisturbed parliamentary work and to protect the authority and dignity of Parliament. The regulatory basis for restricting MPs’ rights and prescribing obligations for them is Parliament’s autonomy, under which the internal rules of Parliament may be determined independently, based on parliamentary self-governance.
Under the Rules of the House of the French Assemblée Nationale, where a warning recorded in the minutes is given to an MP, the latter automatically loses one quarter of his/her monthly remuneration. In a recent case, which took place in the Assemblée Nationale on 8 October 2013 when the speech of Ms V.M., a Green Party MP, was interrupted several times from the opposition benches by a UMP party MP who kept clucking like a chicken, Parliamentary group leaders unanimously sanctioned the latter by withholding one quarter of his monthly remuneration for the “sexist nature of his conduct”.
Fines exist in Germany, Slovakia and the Czech Republic.
Examples of the restriction, suspension or withdrawal of MPs’ rights for inappropriate conduct or for disturbing Parliament’s order can be found in Bulgaria (exclusion), the United Kingdom (exclusion, withdrawal of mandate), Greece (reprimand, temporary suspension), France, Poland, Lithuania (exclusion), Luxembourg (suspension and reprimand), the Romanian Lower House and the Czech Republic.
An order to leave the chamber, suspension (mostly for a fixed period) and exclusion exist in many Member States, and the sanctions are made more severe by the fact that during the period of expulsion/suspension, in most Member States MPs are not allowed to perform any tasks related to their parliamentary work.
Where severe sanctions are imposed, in some Member States (the Czech Republic, Portugal, Slovenia) MPs may, as a legal remedy, turn to the plenary (or a committee) of Parliament as an appeal forum. In the Polish Lower House, MPs may seek a review of the Speaker’s decision before the presidium and a review of the presidium’s decision before the House (in case of exclusion or withdrawal of remuneration).
Leave to make a speech in the form of giving an explanation or making an apology is generally secured for sanctioned MPs in order to enable them to present their opinion. Leave to make a speech – which can only be availed of in respect of misdemeanours of minor gravity – is also known as a moral disciplinary sanction (obligatory apology-making).
In view of the above, the Court notes that at least in a considerable minority of the Council of Europe Member States, a fine may be imposed on Members of Parliament or they may lose part of their salary in case of temporary expulsion (suspension). Among these States some form of gradualism is common. For example, any MP whose conduct is disorderly is called to order by the President of the House (Speaker). When an MP who has already been called to order is called to order again in the same sitting, the call to order is recorded in the minutes, etc. (see, for example, the French Assemblée Nationale; the Latvian Parliament; the House of Commons in the United Kingdom, the Polish Senate). There is often an appeal against the decision of the Speaker to one of the bodies of Parliament; and out of thirteen countries which impose financial sanctions as disciplinary measures, constitutional court powers to hear disciplinary matters exist in certain circumstances in Portugal, Austria, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Slovakia and the Czech Republic.