The case originated in an application (no. 21129/09) against the Russian Federation lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Russian national, Mr Shaaman Banzhayev (“the applicant”), on 26 March 2009.
The applicant was represented by Mr D.S. Itslayev, a lawyer practising in Grozny. The Russian Government (“the Government”) were represented by Mr M. Galperin, Representative of the Russian Federation to the European Court of Human Rights.
On 13 July 2018 the Government were given notice of the complaints under Articles 2 and 13 of the Convention concerning the killing of the applicant’s wife, his brother’s abduction, the authorities’ failure to effectively investigate the incidents and the lack of effective remedies for the alleged violations. The remainder of the application was declared inadmissible pursuant to Rule 54 § 3 of the Rules of Court. The Government did not object to the examination of the application by a Committee.
The applicant was born in 1966 and lives in Komsomolskoye.
The applicant is the widower of Ms Malika Vanayeva, who was born in 1975 and the brother of Mr Shamkhan Banzhayev, who was born in 1969.
The circumstances of the case, as submitted by the applicant and uncontested by the Government, may be summarised as follows.
The killing of Ms Malika Vanayeva and the ensuing investigation
In 2001, during the active phase of the military counter-terrorist operation of the Russian federal forces in the Chechen Republic, the applicant, his wife Ms Malika Vanayeva and their four minor children were living in the village of Gezenchu (also spelt as Gezinchu) in the Vedeno district. The village’s population comprised fewer than a dozen families.
In August 2001 the village was subjected to shelling by the Russian artillery on several occasions.
On 25 August 2001 (in the documents submitted the date was also cited as 25 August 2005) the applicant and his wife were at home. At about 3 or 4 p.m. they heard sounds of explosions coming from the nearby forest in the vicinity of the village of Shirdi-Mokkh. The applicant’s wife told him that their children were playing with their nephews in the nearby house of the applicant’s brother, Mr Shirvani Banzhayev.
Immediately afterwards a bomb exploded in the courtyard of Mr Shirvani Banzhayev’s house and then a few more close by. The applicant’s children ran home scared. The applicant asked his wife to hide them in the basement and ran to his brother’s house to offer help in case anyone had been wounded. The shelling stopped for a few minutes.
On the way to his brother’s house, the applicant heard a gunshot − which had been fired from the direction of Engenoy (also spelt as Enginoy) village − and fell to the ground, as the bullet had hit his left leg. Shortly afterwards a bomb exploded next to him and he saw his sister and sisterinlaw on the ground, both bleeding heavily. The applicant’s brother Mr Islam Banzhayev and their relative Mr R.G. were close to the applicant’s house, along with several other relatives trying to hide from the resumed bombing.
As a result of the second round of shelling, the applicant’s wife and his relative R.G. were killed on the spot by a bomb which had become caught in a tree next to the house and had then exploded, while his youngest son Turpal-Ali and his relative Sh.G. suffered shrapnel wounds.
The applicant and his wounded relatives were immediately taken to Sayasan Hospital in the Nozhay-Yurt district, in the vicinity of Engenoy, and provided with medical help.
According to death certificate no. 52 issued by the local administration and dated 6 December 2005, Ms Malika Vanayeva died on 25 August 2001 from multiple shrapnel wounds to the head and chest. Her death was officially registered on 22 October 2001.
In the applicant’s submission, following his emergency treatment in Sayasan, he had been transferred to Hospital no. 2 in Gudermes and subsequently to a hospital in Argun. He stated that, during the weeks he was hospitalised, some uniformed representatives of the authorities had questioned his wounded relatives about the shelling of Gezenchu.
In 2002, due to frequent shelling, all of the residents left Gezenchu village and the settlement became abandoned.
On 4 September 2001 and again on 7 September 2001 the applicant’s brother, Mr Shamkhan Banzhayev – who was the head of the village administration at the time – lodged an official complaint about the shelling with the head of the Chechnya administration, the Chechnya military prosecutor, the Chechnya military commander and the Chechnya prosecutor. He stated that their village had been subjected to unprovoked shelling by the military unit stationed next to Engenoy in the Nozhay-Yurt district. As a result of the deliberate actions of the military servicemen who had launched around twelve to fifteen bombs, four families and their houses had been destroyed, six people had been wounded and two had been killed. He argued that, since only seven families had been living in the village at the time, the federal forces could readily have ascertained that, due to its size, the village would have been unable to harbour illegal armed groups without the authorities’ knowledge. He provided information about the people who had been killed and wounded during the shelling and stated that on 24 August 2001 he and a number of other representatives of the local community had gone to the military base in Engenoy and spoken with them in an effort to prevent any bombing. The military officers had told them that their orders were usually given to them by the Khankala headquarters, but had promised to keep their request in mind. On 25 August 2001 the village had nonetheless been shelled. Mr Shamkhan Banzhayev requested that the military servicemen responsible be identified and prosecuted.
On 19 September 2001 Mr Shamkhan Banzhayev again complained about the shelling, this time to the Vedeno prosecutor and the head of the Vedeno district administration, reiterating his previous complaints (see paragraph 17 above). He described in detail the circumstances of the shelling and its casualties. He requested that the incident be investigated with the participation of military prosecutors, and that the perpetrators amongst the Russian federal forces be prosecuted. He explained that on 24 August 2001 he and a number of representatives of the local community, including several teachers, had gone to the military unit stationed next to Engenoy village to tell them that there was no reason to shell Gezenchu. The military servicemen had responded by saying that they received their orders from the Khankala headquarters but that they would not bomb Gezenchu. However, the following day they had subjected the village to bombing, disregarding the fact that it was populated by civilians. The applicant’s brother enclosed a number of medical certificates with the complaint confirming the injuries sustained by the Gezenchu residents.
On 24 November 2001 the interim Chechnya military commander informed Mr Shamkhan Banzhayev that:
“ ... concerning the complaint about the shelling on 25 August 2001 of Gezenchu resulting in local residents being injured, the Vedeno prosecutor’s office is carrying out an inquiry to decide whether to open a criminal case against the perpetrators ...”
From the documents submitted it appears that between 2001 and 2002 the applicant’s brother Mr Shamkhan Banzhayev, in his capacity as head of the Gezenchu administration, called on various authorities with a view to having the perpetrators of the shelling identified and prosecuted.
According to the applicant, on 15 November 2002 Mr Shamkhan Banzhayev was abducted, allegedly by military servicemen (see below).
After his brother’s disappearance, the applicant and his family were concerned for their personal safety. It is unclear whether they continued to push for an investigation into the shelling. However, at some point in early 2007 the applicant complained that there had been no investigation into the shelling, prompting the authorities to initiate one.
On 23 July 2007 the Vedeno prosecutor’s office (“the investigators”) opened criminal case no. 23031. The decision stated:
“ ... on 25 August 2001 unidentified servicemen subjected the village of Gezenchu in the Vedeno district to artillery shelling, from the direction of Engenoy village in the Nozhay-Yurt district. As a result, M. Vanayeva and R.G. were killed ...
The actions of the unidentified servicemen provide sufficient grounds for them to be classified as a crime punishable under [paragraph] 3 of Article 109 [causing death to two or more persons by negligence] ...”
On 2 August 2007 the investigators granted the applicant victim status in the criminal case and questioned him. The applicant’s description of the shelling was similar to that given in his submissions to the Court. In addition, he stated that his brother, Mr Shamkhan Banzhayev, as head of the Gezenchu administration, had negotiated with the military unit stationed next to Engenoy that they would not shell Gezenchu, but to no avail. The shelling had been carried out by the military unit from its location next to Engenoy the day after his visit. In addition, the applicant stated that Mr Shamkhan Banzhayev had been abducted and had gone missing in November 2002.
On 23 September 2007 the investigators suspended the investigation in the criminal case for failure to identify the perpetrators. It is unclear whether the applicant was informed of this suspension.
On 30 October 2007 the deputy head of the Shali district investigative committee (“the investigators’ supervisor”) overruled the suspension as premature and unsubstantiated and ordered a number of steps to be taken.
On 1 December 2007 the investigators again suspended the proceedings. From the documents submitted it does not appear that the steps ordered on 30 October 2007 were ever taken. It appears that the applicant was not informed of the suspension.
From the documents submitted it appears that the investigation is still ongoing.
On 17 November 2008 the applicant complained to the Shali District Court that the investigation into the shelling and the killing of his wife had been ineffective and requested, inter alia, that the court instruct the investigators to resume the investigation. In particular, he argued that the investigators had not taken any effective steps to solve the crime and claimed that they had even tried to cover it up. The applicant pointed out that it would not be very difficult to establish what type of weapons had been used for the shelling or identify the military unit which had had such ammunition.
On 19 December 2008 the Shali District Court allowed the complaint in part, stating that the applicant had failed to specify which exact steps the investigation would need to take. The court ordered the investigators to grant the applicant’s requests and allow him access to the criminal case file to the extent permitted by the relevant domestic regulations.
Abduction of Mr Shamkhan Banzhayev
According to the applicant, at about 3 p.m. on 15 November 2002 his brother was abducted by armed servicemen close to the Vedeno military commander’s office on Tsentralnya Street and has been missing ever since. The abductors approached him at the entrance checkpoint as he was leaving the military commander’s office, forced him into a UAZ-type minibus (tabletka) and drove off.
The applicant did not witness the abduction, but the documents submitted indicate that his version of events corresponds with the material in the criminal case file.
According to the applicant, his brother’s abduction was perpetrated by military servicemen who wanted to stop him requesting the prosecution of the servicemen responsible for the shelling of Gezenchu on 25 August 2001.
On 26 November 2002 the applicant complained of his brother’s abduction to the Vedeno district prosecutor’s office and requested that the incident be investigated:
“... at about 4 p.m. on 15 November 2002 my brother Shamkhan Banzhayev, the head of the Gezenchu village administration, was arrested when exiting the checkpoint at the entrance to the military commander’s office by men in military uniforms and balaclavas. No explanations were given and no charges were brought against him.
My brother has been missing ever since his arrest and there has been no news concerning his whereabouts ...”
No reply was given to this complaint.
On 23 June 2003 the applicant again complained of his brother’s abduction, this time to the Vedeno district police department, and requested that an investigation be initiated. His complaint was officially registered as number 62 and on 2 July 2003 the police opened a search file. It appears that the applicant was informed of the opening of the search file.
On 22 June 2005 the acting Vedeno district prosecutor decided to initiate a criminal investigation (case no. 53028) into the abduction of Mr Shamkhan Banzhayev, stating that:
“ ... during an inspection of [the Vedeno district] police station and its registration logs, it was discovered that a case [a search file] had been opened in response to Mr R. Banzhayev’s complaint. However, neither a decision [nor a refusal] to open the criminal case ... had been given. Therefore, ... it has been decided that a criminal case will be opened now ...”
It appears that the applicant was provided with a copy of that decision on 19 April 2007.
On 10 August 2005 the applicant was granted victim status and questioned on 11 August 2005. He gave the same version of events as that later submitted to the Court and stated that Mr B.L., his brother’s bodyguard, and Mr V.K., a friend, had been with his brother at the time of his abduction.
On the same day Mr B.L. was questioned. He stated that he had seen a group of armed men accompany Mr Shamkhan Banzhayev to an UAZtype minibus, which had had no registration number, and then drive off. No force had been used against him. The driver of the minibus had told him that they were going to the military commander’s office in DyshneVedeno and would be back in an hour.
On 13 August 2005 Mr V.K. was questioned. He stated that he had seen ten to fifteen armed men in camouflage and masks surround Mr Shamkhan Banzhayev, force him into an UAZ-type minibus and then drive off.
On 22 August 2005 the investigation was suspended. That decision was overruled by the investigators’ superior on 9 January 2006. On 9 February 2006 the investigation was suspended again. The applicant was not informed of that decision.
On 23 September 2006 the investigators’ superior overruled the decision to suspend the investigation. The applicant was informed of that decision.
In September and October 2006 the supervising prosecutors instructed the investigators to take a number of investigative steps, including questioning the applicant’s relatives and the men who had been with his brother at the time of his abduction, as well as the military personnel of the Vedeno military commander’s office.
On 26 September 2006 the head of the Vedeno district administration, Mr D.Kh., was questioned. No new information was obtained.
On an unspecified date in 2006 the applicant was questioned again and confirmed his previous statement.
On 20 October 2006 the investigators examined the crime scene, the premises of the Vedeno military commander’s office on Tsentralnaya Street. No evidence was collected.
On the same day Mr B.L. was questioned again. He stated that Mr Shamkhan Banzhayev had always carried his service pistol with him, including on the day of the incident.
On 21 October 2006 Mr T.K., at whose home Mr Shamkhan Banzhayev had stayed several times, was questioned. He stated that at the material time a group of armed men under the command of the Yamadayev brothers had been stationed in Vedeno.
On 21 and 22 October 2006 Mr M.Kh. and Mr U.M., former bodyguards of Mr Shamkhan Banzhayev, were questioned, but provided no new information.
On 23 November 2006 the investigators suspended the proceedings. The applicant was informed of that decision.
On 21 September 2017 the investigators’ superior overruled the decision to suspend the proceedings and informed the applicant.
On 25 October 2017 the investigation was suspended again, before being resumed again on 28 September 2018.
From the documents submitted it appears that the investigation is still ongoing.
For a summary of the relevant domestic law, see Abuyeva and Others v. Russia (no. 27065/05, §§ 165-68, 2 December 2010), and Aslakhanova and Others v. Russia (nos. 2944/06 and 4 others, §§ 43-84, 18 December 2012).