The case originated in an application (no. 16595/02) against the  lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Russian national, Mr Aleksandr Ivanovich Golovkin (“the applicant”), on 3 April 2002.
The Russian Government (“the Government”) were represented by Mr P. Laptev, the former Representative of the  at the European Court of Human Rights.
On 14 December 2005 the Court decided to communicate the complaints concerning the length of the proceedings and the lack of remedies in that respect to the Government. Applying Article 29 § 3 of the Convention, it decided to rule on the admissibility and merits of the application at the same time.
The Government objected to the joint examination of the admissibility and merits of the application. Having examined the Government’s objection, having regard to the subject matter of the application and the Court’s case-law, the Court dismissed the Government’s objection.
The applicant was born in 1964 and lives in .
At the relevant time the applicant was the director of the  branch of a Russian limited company, Uniya. In 1997 and 1998 the company imported several consignments of alcohol from Germany to the  region, acting as a commissioner or, in some instances, as a buyer of that alcohol.
On 29 April 1998 the police initiated criminal investigation into the business activities of Uniya (criminal case no. 52012). Within the framework of this investigation the applicant was charged with illegal trading, tax evasion and money laundering (Articles 171, 199 and 174 of the Criminal Code respectively). He was ordered not to leave  without authorisation from the prosecution authorities.
In the course of the trial the prosecutor withdrew the accusation under Article 174, but supported the other charges against the applicant. The applicant pleaded not guilty.
According to the Government, the time-limits of the investigation were extended several times: on 23 June, 25 July, 14 October 1998 and 19 January 1999. The investigation was completed on 23 April 1999, and the applicant obtained access to the case file. In September 1999 the case was transmitted to the court for examination on the merits.
According to the applicant, on two occasions in 2000 hearings had been adjourned due to the absence of the judge and of the public prosecutor. On 24 November 2000 the Baltiyskiy District Court of Kaliningrad fully acquitted the applicant.
On 20 March 2001 the  Regional Court, on an appeal by the prosecutor, quashed the acquittal and remitted the case to the prosecution authorities for further investigation, referring to “incompleteness of the pre-trial investigation and trial”. The court of appeal found that the case was not ready for trial and ordered the prosecution authorities to carry out certain additional investigative actions in respect of foreign partners of the company.
Following receipt of the case file from the court on 19 April 2001, the prosecution reopened the investigation and extended the time-limit for its completion. In the following years the completion of the investigation was reported several times. Thus, on 3 May 2001 the prosecution extended the time-limit for the investigation referring to the need to carry out additional investigative actions. On 18 July 2001 the time-limit was extended again. According to the Government, it was done in order to obtain new evidence, in particular, to carry out an audit of the business activities of Uniya. On 24 October 2001 the time-limit was extended anew. The prosecution referred to the need to obtain new evidence, to translate and send several requests for legal assistance addressed to the foreign authorities. On 8 February 2002 the time-limit of the investigation was extended with the reference to the need to obtain evidence in . On 9 April 2002 the time-limit was extended in order to obtain evidence in . On 25 July 2002 the time-limits were extended since the prosecution authorities had not received the replies to their requests for legal assistance from Great Britain and . On 17 February, 16 May and 27 August 2003 the time-limit was extended again, in order to complete the investigation. In sum, according to the Government, throughout the investigation the authorities had obtained twelve expert examinations. They had also sent out nine requests to foreign authorities for legal assistance. The materials of the case were contained in fifty-nine case files.
The applicant, in his turn, made several attempts to have the criminal proceedings against him terminated. To this end he lodged a number of complaints challenging various decisions of the investigative authorities.
Thus, on 25 July 2002 the applicant challenged the initial decision to open the criminal investigation into the allegedly illegal traffic of alcohol. On 31 July 2002 the Leningradskiy District Court of Kaliningrad left that complaint unexamined. The court found that the Code of Criminal Procedure did not provide for judicial control over that kind of decision by the prosecution authorities. On 10 September 2002 the  upheld the lower court’s view.
On an unspecified date the applicant requested the prosecutor in charge of his case to close the investigation. The investigative authorities refused. In July 2002 the applicant challenged the refusal before the court. On 9 August 2002 the Leningradskiy District Court of Kaliningrad rejected his complaint. On 17 September 2002 the , after examining an appeal by the applicant against the decision of 9 August 2002, decided to discontinue its review of the prosecutor’s refusal to close the investigation. The court of appeal found that the Code of Criminal Procedure did not provide for judicial review of the refusal of the investigative authorities to close the investigation.
In 2002 the applicant challenged the decision to extend the timelimit for the investigation. On 8 August 2002 the Baltiyskiy District Court found that the extension of the time-limit for the pre-trial investigation had been lawful and necessary, because in its decision of 20 March 2001 the court of appeal had ordered additional investigative actions to be carried out abroad, in several European countries. Consequently, the extension of the time-limit had been justified. That decision was upheld by the  on 8 October 2002.
Early in 2003 the applicant challenged the decision of 29 April 1998, which had ordered the investigation of his case to be opened. On 19 May 2003 the court found that everything had been conducted properly in respect of that decision and consequently rejected the complaint. The applicant appealed, claiming that the first-instance court had only examined the formal side of the decision, without assessing whether the criminal prosecution was necessary in the circumstances. On 17 June 2003 the  dismissed the applicant’s appeal and upheld the first-instance court’s decision.
On 29 May 2003 the applicant challenged the decision to prosecute him for the above crimes. On 5 June 2003 the Baltiyskiy District Court replied to the applicant by a simple letter, in which it informed the applicant that the Code of Criminal Procedure did not provide for judicial review of the decision complained of. The applicant appealed. On 16 June 2003 the appeal was returned to him unexamined, because a simple letter of the court was not subject to appeal.
On 14 November 2003 the investigation was completed and the accused and his lawyer were given access to the case-file. On 22 December 2003 the criminal case was sent to the Baltiyskiy Transport Prosecutor for referral to the Baltiyskiy District Court of Kaliningrad for examination on the merits. However, according to the Government, for certain procedural reasons the case did not reach the District Court until 15 September 2004.
On 31 May 2005 the Baltiyskiy District Court found the applicant guilty of illegal trading. He was acquitted of the other charges. The court sentenced the applicant to two years’ imprisonment, but ordered the sentence to be suspended due to the expiry of the statutory time-limit within which a person can be prosecuted for such crimes (истечение срока давности привлечения к уголовной ответственности).
On 22 September 2005 the  Regional Court, acting on appeal, quashed the judgment of 31 May 2005 and decided to discontinue the proceedings in the applicant’s case due to the expiry of the statutory time-limit.