The case originated in an application (no. 16026/12) against the Republic of Turkey lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Kazakhstani national, Mr Samat Amerkhanov (“the applicant”), on 12 March 2012.
The applicant was represented by Mr A. Yılmaz and Ms S.N. Yılmaz, lawyers practising in Istanbul. The Turkish Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent.
On 19 March 2012 at 4.22 p.m. the applicant’s lawyer sent a fax message to the Court in which, relying on Rule 39 of the Rules of Court, he asked the Court to suspend the applicant’s deportation to Kazakhstan, which was scheduled to take place at 7.45 p.m. on the same day.
On the same day at 6.51 p.m. the applicant’s lawyer was informed that due to its late submission, the Court was not in a position to consider his request.
On 12 December 2016 the complaints concerning the applicant’s deportation to Kazakhstan and the alleged poor conditions of the applicant’s detention at the Kumkapı Foreigners’ Removal Centre, the lack of effective remedies in respect of the above-mentioned complaints, the alleged unlawfulness of the applicant’s detention at the Kumkapı Foreigners’ Removal Centre, the absence of communication of information to the applicant on the reasons for his detention, and the complaints concerning the lack of an effective remedy by which to challenge the lawfulness of his detention and to request compensation were communicated to the Government, and the remainder of the application was declared inadmissible pursuant to Rule 54 § 3 of the Rules of Court.
The applicant was born in 1989 and is detained in Atyrau, Kazakhstan.
According to the applicant’s submissions, he lived in Atyrau, Kazakhstan until 2010. Between January and November 2010 the applicant was constantly harassed by the police, taken into police custody and
On 9 June 2011 with a view to requesting a residence permit in Turkey, the applicant went to the Istanbul police headquarters, where he was arrested. The Government submitted that (i) subsequent to his arrival in Turkey 21 May 2011, an entry ban was issued in respect of the applicant, as he was considered to constitute a threat to national security, and (ii) he was detained with a view to his deportation.
On the same day the applicant was transferred to the Kumkapı Foreigners’ Removal Centre.
On unspecified dates the applicant applied to the national authorities and to the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR), asking to be recognised as a refugee.
On 15 June 2011 a police officer conducted an interview with the applicant in the context of his application to be granted asylum.
On 28 June 2011 the applicant was notified by the police that his asylum application had been rejected.
On 29 June 2011 the UNHCR issued an asylum-seeker certificate to the applicant.
On 5 July 2011 one of the applicant’s representatives, Mr A. Yılmaz, lodged an objection to the decision to reject the applicant’s asylum application with the police department responsible for foreigners, borders and asylum attached to the Istanbul police headquarters. The lawyer asked the authorities to review their decision and to conduct a second interview with the applicant.
On 11 July 2011 Mr A. Yılmaz lodged an application with the Istanbul Magistrates’ Court for his client’s release. The applicant’s lawyer also stressed that the applicant was being kept in poor detention conditions. He received no response to his application.
On 16 August 2011 the police conducted a second interview with the applicant, during which he claimed that he would be exposed to a real risk of death and duress at the hands of the police if deported to Kazakhstan. In his statement, the applicant claimed that he had already been ill-treated by the police in Kazakhstan and that the authorities had imprisoned religious people like him on false accusations.
On 22 and 25 August 2011 Mr A. Yılmaz lodged two further applications with the police for his client to be released. He submitted that the applicant was being sought for by the Kazakhstan authorities for political reasons and that he would be persecuted on the basis of his religious convictions and subjected to torture and ill-treatment if deported to his country. In support of his petition dated 22 August 2011, the applicant’s lawyer submitted a document showing that the applicant was being sought for by the public authorities in Atyrau on suspicion of having committed the offence of “hooliganism”, proscribed by Article 257 § 3 of the Kazakhstan Criminal Code, as in force at the material time. He also submitted a copy of a page of a newspaper published in Kazakhstan in April 2011 according to which an arrest warrant had been issued in respect of the applicant.
On 13 September 2011 the applicant was released from the Kumkapı Foreigners’ Removal Centre. The applicant was ordered to go and live in the province of Sakarya pending the determination of his asylum application.
On 29 September 2011 the applicant went to Sakarya, where he lived until 15 March 2012.
On 24 October 2011 the applicant was granted a residence permit, valid until 20 May 2012.
On 3 November 2011 the InterpolEuropol Department attached to the General Police Headquarters requested the Foreigners, Borders and Asylum Department (also attached to the General Police Headquarters) to provide information regarding the applicant, noting that he was sought for by the prosecuting authorities and the Interpol bureau of Kazakhstan as he was suspected of having committed an offence in that country. On 1 December 2011 the deputy head of the Foreigners, Borders and Asylum Department informed the InterpolEuropol Department that the applicant had requested asylum and was residing in Sakarya and that on 24 October 2011 a further entry ban had been issued in respect of him after the applicant had been prosecuted for “hooliganism”. The Foreigners, Borders and Asylum Department requested the InterpolEuropol department not to provide any information to the Kazakhstan authorities, in the interests of the safety of the applicant and his family members in Kazakhstan.
On 15 March 2012 the applicant was served with a document informing him that his asylum application had been rejected on 2 March 2012 and that he could not benefit from subsidiary protection either. The document informed him that he was banned from entering Turkish territory and that if he attempted to enter Turkish territory, he would be deported. On the same day the applicant was detained.
On 16 and 19 March 2012 Mr A. Yılmaz lodged two applications with the Ministry of the Interior requesting that his client be released. The lawyer noted that he had received a phone call from the applicant, who had stated that he would be deported to Kazakhstan, where he would be subjected to torture.
On 19 March 2012 the applicant was deported to Kazakhstan.
In a letter dated 27 May 2013, Mr Yılmaz submitted that the applicant had been transferred to the custody of Kazakhstan’s security forces upon his return to Kazakhstan and had then been remanded in custody in Atyrau Prison. The lawyer stated that he did not have information supported by any document as to whether the applicant had been subjected to ill-treatment in Kazakhstan.
On 22 March 2012 Mr A. Yılmaz lodged an application with the Ankara Administrative Court for the annulment of the decisions of the Ministry rejecting the applicant’s asylum application and to deport the applicant from Turkey. He requested a stay of execution of the decision to deport the applicant, pending the proceedings before the Ankara Administrative Court. In support of his petition, the applicant’s lawyer submitted a number of documents to the Ankara Administrative Court, including a document downloaded from the Atyrau police department website, according to which an arrest warrant had been issued in respect of the applicant. The document, which was also submitted to the Court, contained the applicant’s name, photograph and the charge brought against him (“hooliganism”, under Article 257 § 3 of the Kazakhstan Criminal Code). He also submitted the newspaper page (see paragraph 17 above), which he had already submitted to the police on 22 August 2011 and according to which an arrest warrant had been issued in respect of the applicant.
On 11 May 2012 the Ankara Administrative Court rejected the request for a stay of execution in respect of the applicant’s deportation.
On 13 February 2013 the Ankara Administrative Court dismissed the application lodged by the applicant on 22 March 2012. In its judgment, the administrative court noted that according to information obtained from the National Intelligence Organisation (Milli İstihbarat Teşkilatı), the applicant was involved in international terrorism and had carried out terrorist activities when he had been in Turkey. The Ankara Administrative Court further noted that the applicant’s asylum application had been rejected as the administrative authorities had found that there had not been any basis for the applicant’s fear of persecution and that he had not met the conditions for being considered a refugee. On the basis of the documents in the case file, the Administrative Court concluded that the administrative decision to reject the applicant’s asylum application and to deport the applicant from Turkey had been lawful.
Following an appeal by the applicant, on 27 April 2016 the Supreme Administrative Court upheld the judgment of 13 February 2013.
Between 9 June and 13 September 2011 the applicant was detained at the Kumkapı Foreigners’ Removal Centre. The applicant claimed that the centre had been overcrowded at the time of his detention. He had not been allowed exercise outdoor or any other type of social activity throughout his detention. The applicant further alleged that there had been hygiene problems at the centre and that the quantity of the food provided had also been poor.
The Government submitted that the Kumkapı Foreigners’ Removal Centre where the applicant had been held had a capacity of 300 persons and that a total of between 100 and 150 persons had been held during the period between 9 June and 13 September 2011. Detainees were accommodated on three floors: the first two floors were reserved for male detainees, and the third floor for females. There were four dormitory rooms on the first floor, measuring 50, 58, 76 and 84 sq. m. On the second floor there were five dormitories measuring 50, 58, 69, 76 and 84 sq. m. There was a total of 120 bunk beds in the ten rooms reserved for male detainees and all rooms received natural light. There were also five showers and six toilets per floor, as well as a cafeteria measuring 69 sq. m, where breakfast, lunch and dinner were served daily on each floor. The detainees had the right to outdoor exercise if the physical conditions and the number of staff available allowed. A doctor was present on the premises every week and the detainees also had access to medical care in cases of emergency. As for the hygiene in the facility, there were six cleaning staff working full time and cleaning products, such as soap, were provided on a regular basis.
A description of the relevant domestic law and practice regarding the expulsion of foreign nationals, as in force at the material time, can be found in Abdolkhani and Karimnia v. Turkey (no. 30471/08, §§ 29-43, 22 September 2009).
In its Concluding Observations of 12 December 2008 on Kazakhstan (CAT/C/KAZ/CO/2) the UN Committee against Torture made the following observations:
“...7.  The Committee is concerned about consistent allegations concerning the frequent use of torture and ill-treatment, including threat of sexual abuse and rape, committed by law enforcement officers, often to extract “voluntary confessions” or information to be used as evidence in criminal proceedings, so as to meet the success criterion determined by the number of crimes solved (arts. 2, 11 and 12). ...
The Committee is particularly concerned about allegations of torture or other
A document entitled “List of issues prior to the submission to the third periodic report of Kazakhstan” (CAT/C/KAZ/3), examined by the UN Committee Against Torture at its forty-fifth session in November 2010 and published in February 2011, states, in so far as relevant:
“ ...Article 2
According to information before the Committee since the consideration of the previous periodic report in 2008, torture and ill-treatment, including the threat of sexual abuse and rape, committed by law enforcement officials, remain an issue of serious concern in the State party, and do not occur in isolated or infrequent instances.”
In its Concluding Observations of 12 December 2014 on Kazakhstan (CAT/C/KAZ/CO/3), the UN Committee against Torture made the following observations:
“...7.  While welcoming the measures taken by the State party aimed at strengthening laws and policies concerning its protection of human rights and prevention of torture and ill-treatment, described above, the Committee remains concerned at reports that those laws and policies are inconsistently implemented in practice. The Committee is particularly concerned about persistent allegations of torture and ill-treatment committed by law enforcement officials, including the threat of sexual abuse and rape, in temporary detention isolation facilities (IVSs) and remand centres (SIZOs) under the jurisdiction of the Ministry of Internal Affairs and the National Security Committee for the purpose of extracting “voluntary confessions” or information to be used as evidence in criminal proceedings (art. 2)...”
From 5 until 13 May 2009 the former United Nations Special Rapporteur on torture and other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment, Mr Manfred Nowak, undertook a visit to Kazakhstan. In his report of 16 December 2009, submitted to the Human Rights Council, Mr Nowak observed, inter alia, the following:
“...Whereas the physical conditions and food supply in the prison colonies seem to have been brought into line with international minimum standards in recent years, one of the key requirements of international human rights law — that penitentiary systems put rehabilitation and reintegration rather than the punishment of the individual offender at their core — has not been achieved; the restrictions on contact with the outside world provided by law contradict that very principle. Another major issue of concern is the fact that the hierarchy among prisoners appears to lead to discriminatory practices and, in some cases, to violence.
The same is true for pre-trial detention and custody facilities. The pre-trial facilities of the Ministry of the Interior, the Committee of National Security and the Ministry of Justice seem to have undergone improvements in terms of physical conditions and food supply; however the almost total denial of contacts with the outside world, often for prolonged periods, clearly contradicts the principle of the presumption of innocence and puts disproportional psychological pressure on suspects.
On the basis of discussions with public officials, judges, lawyers and representatives of civil society, interviews with victims of violence and with persons deprived of their liberty, the Special Rapporteur concludes that the use of torture and ill-treatment certainly goes beyond isolated instances. He received many credible allegations of beatings with hands and fists, plastic bottles filled with sand, police truncheons, and of kicking, asphyxiation with plastic bags and gas masks used to obtain confessions from suspects. In several cases, these allegations were supported by forensic medical evidence...”
The UN Human Rights Committee’s thirty-fifth annual report adopted on 28 July 2011 (A/66/40 (Vol.I)), in so far as relevant to Kazakhstan, reads as follows:
“...(8)  While the Committee appreciates the State party’s need to adopt measures to combat acts of terrorism, including the formulation of appropriate legislation to punish such acts, it regrets reports that law enforcement officials target vulnerable groups such as asylum-seekers and members of Islamic groups in their activities to combat terrorism (arts. 2 and 26).
The State party should adopt measures to ensure that the activities of its law enforcement officials in the fight against terrorism do not target individuals solely on the basis of their status or religious belief and manifestation. Furthermore, the State party should ensure that any measures to combat terrorism are compatible with the Covenant and international human rights law. In this regard, the State party should compile comprehensive data, to be included in its next periodic report, on the implementation of anti-terrorism legislation and how it affects the enjoyment of rights under the Covenant.
...
(14)  While noting the adoption of an action plan for 2010–2012 on the implementation of recommendations of the Committee against Torture, the Committee expresses concern at increased reports of torture and the low rate of investigation of allegations of torture by the Special Procurators. The Committee is also concerned that the maximum penalty (10 years’ imprisonment) for torture resulting in death under article 347-1 of the Criminal Code is too low (art. 7).
The State party should take appropriate measures to put an end to torture by, inter alia, strengthening the mandate of the Special Procurators to carry out independent investigations of alleged misconduct by law enforcement officials. In this connection, the State party should ensure that law enforcement personnel continue to receive training on the prevention of torture and ill-treatment by integrating the Manual on the Effective Investigation and Documentation of Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment (the Istanbul Protocol) of 1999 in all training programmes for law enforcement officials. The State party should thus ensure that allegations of torture and ill-treatment are effectively investigated, that perpetrators are prosecuted and punished with appropriate sanctions, and that the victims receive adequate reparation. In this regard, the State party is encouraged to review its Criminal Code to ensure that penalties on torture are commensurate with the nature and gravity of such crimes. ...”
In its 2011 Report on Human Rights Practices in Kazakhstan, the United States Department of State noted, inter alia, the following:
“The law prohibits torture; nevertheless, the police and prison officials regularly beat and abused detainees, often to obtain confessions...
Human rights activists asserted that the legal definition of torture was too vague and did not meet UN standards and that the penalties for the crime were too lenient. The PGO, the Presidential Human Rights Commission, and the human rights ombudsman acknowledged that some law enforcement officers used torture and other illegal methods of investigation. Human rights and international legal observers noted investigative and prosecutorial practices that overemphasized a defendant’s confession of guilt over collecting other types of evidence in building a criminal case against a defendant. Courts generally ignored allegations by defendants that officials had obtained confessions by torture or duress.
At an October 2010 event hosted by the Office of the UN High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) and several NGOs, Manfred Nowak, the UN special rapporteur on torture and other cruel, inhuman, or degrading treatment or punishment, stated that according to his assessment, torture in Kazakhstan was not widespread, although a culture of impunity allowed police to use extreme methods, such as heavy beating and asphyxiation, to obtain confessions. Nowak stated that police rarely investigated complaints of torture.
...Local NGOs reported that the government acknowledged publicly that torture was a problem.
...”
In its 2012 Report on Human Rights Practices in Kazakhstan, the United States Department of State noted, inter alia, the following:
“...The law prohibits torture; nevertheless, police and prison officials allegedly tortured and abused detainees, often in an effort to obtain or force confessions. For example, a representative from the Kazakhstan International Bureau for Human Rights reported seeing physical signs of torture, including scabbed skin, open wounds, bruises, and evidence of exposure to extreme cold on prisoners. The representative also asserted that authorities generally did not allow human rights observers to observe conditions in penal colonies. Members of the Public Monitoring Commission, a group comprised of NGO representatives, interviewed prisoners in a Kostanai penal colony. After the interview, authorities confiscated the group’s notes and reportedly punished prisoners who had submitted complaints to the commission by beating them and placing them in punitive cells.
According to local NGOs, torture most often occurred in pretrial detention centers in order to obtain confessions.
Authorities charged two police officers from the Saragash District in South Kazakhstan with torture while trying to obtain confessions from three detainees accused of theft. The police officers allegedly placed plastic bags over the detainees’ heads and subjected them to electric shocks.
...The Kazakhstani Commission on Human Rights, which advises the president on human rights issues, reported in 2011 that some law enforcement officers used torture and other illegal methods of investigation. The commission stated that there were no independent institutions to effectively investigate complaints of torture. ...
The human rights ombudsman reviewed prisoner and detainee complaints and concluded that law enforcement officers used abuse or torture to gain confessions ...”
The chapter on Kazakhstan of the Amnesty International report “The State of The World’s Human Rights in 2010”, released on 27 May 2010, in so far as relevant, reads as follows:
“...Confessions extracted under torture continued to be admitted as evidence in trials. Criminal proceedings failed to comply with international standards of fair trial. Torture and other ill-treatment by members of the security forces remained widespread, in particular by officers of the National Security Service in the context of operations in the name of national security, and the fight against terrorism and corruption.
...Torture and other ill-treatment
In November the European Court of Human Rights ruled in the case of Kaboulov v. Ukraine that the extradition to Kazakhstan of any criminal suspect, including Amir Damirovich Kaboulov, would be in violation of Article 3 of the European Convention on Human Rights, as they would run a serious risk of being subjected to torture or inhuman or degrading treatment.
Despite amendments to the criminal and criminal procedural codes to clamp down on abusive practices, torture and other ill-treatment remained widespread. Confessions reportedly extracted under torture continued to be admitted as evidence in criminal trials, and individuals continued to be held in unregistered detention for longer than the three hours allowed for in national law. The lack of a clear definition of detention remained unaddressed despite recommendations of the UN Committee against Torture in November 2008.
Following his visit to Kazakhstan in May 2009, the UN Special Rapporteur on torture concluded that he “received many credible allegations of beatings with hands and fists, plastic bottles filled with sand and police truncheons and of kicking, asphyxiation through plastic bags and gas masks used to obtain confessions from suspects. In several cases, these allegations were supported by forensic medical evidence.”
The chapter on Kazakhstan of the Amnesty International report entitled “The State of The World’s Human Rights in 2011”, released on 13 May 2011, in so far as relevant, reads as follows:
“...The authorities introduced a number of measures intended to prevent torture, including widening access to places of detention to independent public monitors and committing publicly to a policy of zero tolerance on torture.
Kazakhstan’s human rights record was assessed under the UN Universal Periodic Review in February. In its presentation, the government delegation reiterated that the Kazakhstani authorities were committed to a policy of zero tolerance on torture, and that they “would not rest until all vestiges of torture had been fully and totally eliminated”.
In February, the government postponed the creation of an independent detention monitoring mechanism, the National Preventive Mechanism (NPM), for up to three years. However, in line with their obligations under the Optional Protocol to the UN Convention against Torture, the authorities continued to develop a legal framework for the NPM in close co-operation with domestic and international NGOs and intergovernmental organizations.
In April, the Prosecutor General’s Office told Amnesty International that members of Independent Public Monitoring Commissions had been given unprecedented access to pre-trial detention centres of the National Security Service (NSS); four visits had been carried out in 2009 and eight in 2010.
Despite these measures, people in police custody reported that they were frequently subjected to torture and other ill-treatment, both before and after the formal registration of their detention at a police station. Law enforcement officials often failed to respect the existing law on detention, which requires that they register detainees within three hours of their arrest.
In October, the UN Special Rapporteur on torture criticized Kazakhstan for continuing to conceal the full extent of torture and other ill-treatment in its detention and prison system...”