The case concerns the effectiveness of domestic remedies for excessively lengthy proceedings introduced by the 2013 Courts Act.
The applicant was born in 1951 and lives in Zagreb. She was represented by Mr Z. Novaković, a lawyer practising in Zagreb.
The Croatian Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Ms Š. Stažnik.
The facts of the case, as submitted by the parties, may be summarised as follows.
On 31 October 2007 the applicant brought a civil action in the Zagreb Municipal Civil Court (Općinski građanski sud u Zagrebu) against the City of Zagreb and the municipal company Z.H., seeking compensation for injuries sustained in 2005 in a road traffic accident caused by an icy and untreated (that is to say unsalted) road. On 17 January 2008 the company C.O. joined the proceedings as an intervener in support of the defendants.
On 21 January 2008 the applicant requested that the court call two witnesses and obtain the opinion of a road traffic expert.
At a hearing held on 24 June 2008 the court decided to obtain a report from the national meteorological service regarding the weather conditions on the day of the accident. The report was received on 3 October 2008.
At a hearing held on 22 September 2008 the court heard the applicant. The two witnesses failed to attend the hearing.
In the period between 8 December 2008 and 25 January 2011 the court scheduled eight hearings. One was adjourned because the judge assigned to hear the case was ill, and six were adjourned because the two witnesses had either not been properly summoned or failed to attend. On 5 June 2009 the judge fined those witnesses and ordered that they be brought to court by the police. Afterwards only one hearing was held, on 14 October 2010, at which the court heard a third witness, whose testimony in the meantime had been requested by the applicant.
One of the two absent witnesses was eventually heard at a hearing held on 22 February 2011. The applicant eventually, on 5 March 2014, withdrew her request to call the remaining witnesses, whose non-attendance seemed to have been for health reasons.
On 1 June 2011 the court decided to obtain the opinion of a road traffic expert. On 7 June 2011 the expert submitted his opinion and was heard at a hearing held on 8 December 2011.
At a hearing held on 19 April 2012 the court decided to obtain the joint opinion of a team of medical experts in order to assess the nonpecuniary damage sustained by the applicant. They submitted their report on 21 September 2012, which the court then forwarded to the parties for comment. In the period between 23 November 2012 and 25 January 2013 the parties exchanged observations regarding the expert report.
A hearing scheduled for 12 September 2013 was adjourned because the experts could not attend. They were heard at the next hearing, which was held on 21 February 2014.
At a hearing held on 5 March 2014 the court again heard the applicant, who repeated the testimony she had given on 22 September 2008 (see paragraph 8 above).
On 20 May 2014 the Municipal Court closed the main hearing and by a judgment of 3 July 2014 ruled partly in favour of the applicant.
On 11 July 2014 the applicant lodged an appeal and a request to supplement the judgment because no decision had been taken regarding statutory default interest on the costs of the proceedings. The defendants lodged their appeals on 10 and 21 July 2014 respectively. On 26 August 2014 the applicant responded to the defendants’ appeals.
By two decisions adopted on 19 January 2015 the Municipal Court first rectified its judgment of 3 July 2014 and then supplemented it with a decision regarding statutory default interest on the costs of the proceedings.
On 10 March 2015 the applicant and the first defendant appealed against the decision to supplement the judgment. After sending the appeals for response to the other party, the Municipal Court forwarded the case to the Zagreb County Court (Županijski sud u Zagrebu).
On 3 October 2016 the County Court returned the case to the Municipal Court, requesting that it correct some errors in the operative part of the first-instance judgment of 3 July 2014. After correcting those errors in a decision of 21 November 2016, the Municipal Court again forwarded the case to the Zagreb County Court.
By a judgment of 21 March 2017 the Zagreb County Court allowed both appeals in part and dismissed them in part. The applicant was eventually awarded 19,000 Croatian kunas (HRK) in compensation for nonpecuniary damage, HRK 17,630 in compensation for pecuniary damage, and HRK 12,647.57 in costs. The County Court’s judgment was served on the applicant’s representative on 23 May 2017.
Meanwhile, on 1 June 2010 the applicant, relying on the relevant provisions of the 2005 Courts Act (see paragraphs 34-38 below), lodged a request with the Zagreb County Court for protection of her right to a hearing within a reasonable time, complaining that the length of the abovementioned civil proceedings (see paragraphs 5-9 above) had been excessive.
By a decision of 18 February 2011 the Zagreb County Court dismissed her request, finding that the length of the proceedings complained of had not exceeded a reasonable time.
On 17 October 2011 the Supreme Court (Vrhovni sud Republike Hrvatske) dismissed an appeal by the applicant and upheld the County Court’s decision.
On 20 January 2014 the applicant lodged a constitutional complaint under section 63 of the Constitutional Court Act (see paragraphs 27 and 36 below), again complaining of the excessive length of the above-mentioned civil proceedings (see paragraphs 5-13 above). She argued that the lengthof-proceedings remedies provided by the 2013 Courts Act (see paragraph 30 below) were ineffective. She did not mention the fact that she had previously had recourse to the length-of-proceedings remedy provided by the 2005 Courts Act (see paragraphs 21-23 above).
By decision no. U-IIIA-322/2014 of 23 December 2014 the Constitutional Court declared the applicant’s constitutional complaint inadmissible on the grounds that she had not previously attempted to avail herself of other length-of-proceedings remedies, notably those available under the 2013 Courts Act (see paragraphs 39-41 below).
The applicant’s case was the first in which the Constitutional Court held that, despite the availability of (other) length-of-proceedings remedies, a constitutional complaint under section 63 of the Constitutional Court Act (see paragraphs 27 and 29 below) was still available to persons complaining of the excessive length of ongoing judicial proceedings – but only if they had first availed themselves of other length-of-proceedings remedies.
The relevant part of the Constitutional Court’s decision in the applicant’s case reads as follows:
“3.1.  ... since the introduction in 2005 into the domestic legal system of a new remedy (a request for protection of the right to a hearing within a reasonable time under sections 27 and 28 of the 2005 Courts Act), a constitutional complaint under section 63 of the Constitutional Court Act was no longer the only remedy in the Republic of Croatia for protection of the constitutional right to a hearing within a reasonable time. In other words, the Constitutional Court no longer had jurisdiction at first instance to protect the right to a hearing within a reasonable time...
Having regard to paragraph 1 of Article 29 of the Croatian Constitution and sections 62 and 63 of the Constitutional Court Act, and given that ... the 2013 Courts Act provides legal remedies for speeding up judicial proceedings, the Constitutional Court establishes the following rules regarding its jurisdiction to protect the constitutional right to a hearing with a reasonable time:
-  a violation of the right to a hearing within a reasonable time ... as well as the effectiveness of legal remedies under the 2013 Courts Act may, in each individual case, be examined in proceedings initiated by a constitutional complaint lodged under section 62 of the Constitutional Court Act (against the decision on the merits ... after the available remedies have been exhausted) or in proceedings initiated by a constitutional complaint under section 63 of the Constitutional Court Act;
-  apart from the general procedural requirements that every constitutional complaint must meet, a prerequisite for deciding a constitutional complaint in which a violation of the constitutional right to a hearing within a reasonable time has been alleged ([regardless of] whether it was lodged under section 62 or section 63 of the Constitutional Court Act) is, as a rule, that the complainant has previously used all available remedies [to complain] against the unreasonable length of the proceedings.
THE CONSTITUTIONAL COURT’S ASSESSMENT
The complainant [in the present case] considers that the remedies [provided by the 2013 Courts Act] are not ‘an effective remedy within the meaning of Article 13 of the Convention’. In her constitutional complaint the complainant does not mention that she availed herself of those remedies. [T]herefore she is in fact asking the Constitutional Court to assess, in abstract terms, the effectiveness of the remedies provided by the 2013 Courts Act. What is more, she considers herself exempted from the requirement to use those remedies before addressing the Constitutional Court.
The Constitutional Court cannot in these proceedings [instituted by an individual constitutional complaint] enter into the assessment, in abstract terms, of the effectiveness of the legislative model for protection of the right to a hearing within a reasonable time provided by the 2013 Courts Act. It is sufficient to establish, in the light of the position of the ECHR, that this model provides for remedies which are in principle capable of accelerating judicial proceedings and awarding financial compensation for the violation of the right to a hearing within a reasonable time. In Kudła v. Poland (judgment of the Grand Chamber, 26 October 2000, application no. 30210/96), the ECHR expressed the view that the domestic remedy that had been available to the applicant for protection of the right to a hearing within a reasonable time could be considered effective within the meaning of Article 13 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms ... if it prevented the alleged violation or its continuation or provided adequate redress for any violation that had already occurred (§ 158). In the ECHR’s view, Article 13 of the Convention offers an alternative: a remedy is effective if it can be used to either expedite a judicial decision before the violation occurs, or ensure adequate redress for delays that have already occurred (§ 158).
The ECHR expressed the same view in the judgment Scordino v. Italy (no. 1) (judgment of the Grand Chamber, 29 March 2006, application no. 36813/97) and then in the judgment Sürmeli v. Germany (judgment of the Grand Chamber, 8 June 2006, application no. 75529/01): ...
The Constitutional Court emphasises that the above-mentioned views of the ECHR represent the current state of development in that court’s case-law, further development of which cannot be excluded...
The Constitutional Court considers that the complainant’s superficial allegations or her doubts as to the effectiveness of the remedy, which is clearly not (a priori) ineffective, is not a sufficient reason not to have used that remedy before lodging her constitutional complaint.
Given that the complainant in her constitutional complaint did not show that she had used all the available remedies provided by the 2013 Courts Act (nor did she demonstrate that she had used the remedies that had been at her disposal since 2007 when she brought her civil action before an ordinary court), her constitutional complaint is inadmissible.”
The relevant Article of the Constitution of the Republic of Croatia (Ustav Republike Hrvatske, Official Gazette no. 56/90, with subsequent amendments) reads as follows:
Article 29(1)
“Everyone is entitled to have [a case concerning] their rights or obligations, or [concerning] a suspicion or accusation of a criminal offence, decided fairly and within a reasonable time by an independent and impartial court established by law.”
The relevant provisions of the Constitutional Act on the Constitutional Court of the Republic of Croatia (Ustavni zakon o Ustavnom sudu Republike Hrvatske, Official Gazette of the Republic of Croatia no. 99/1999 with subsequent amendments – “the Constitutional Court Act”) read as follows:
PROTECTION OF HUMAN RIGHTS AND FUNDAMENTAL FREEDOMS
Section 62
“(1)  Anyone may lodge a constitutional complaint with the Constitutional Court if he or she deems that the decision of a State authority, local or regional government, or a legal person vested with public authority, on his or her rights or obligations, or as regards suspicion or accusation of a criminal offence, has violated his or her human rights or fundamental freedoms, or the right to local or regional government, guaranteed by the Constitution (‘constitutional rights’) ...
(2)  If another legal remedy is available for the violation of the constitutional rights [complained of], the constitutional complaint may be lodged only after this remedy has been used.
(3)  In matters in which an administrative action or, in civil and non-contentious proceedings, an appeal on points of law [revizija] is available, remedies shall be considered exhausted only after a decision on these legal remedies has been given.”
Section 63
“(1)  The Constitutional Court shall examine a constitutional complaint even before all legal remedies have been exhausted if the relevant court has failed to decide within a reasonable time on the rights or obligations of a party [to the proceedings] or as regards a suspicion or accusation of a criminal offence ...
(2)  If it finds the constitutional complaint regarding failure to decide within a reasonable time referred to in paragraph 1 of this section well-founded, the Constitutional Court shall set a time-limit within which the relevant court must decide the case on the merits ...
(3)  In a decision issued under paragraph 2 of this section, the Constitutional Court shall award appropriate compensation to the complainant for the violation of his or her constitutional right ... to a hearing within a reasonable time. The compensation shall be paid from the State budget within three months of the date on which a request for payment is lodged.”
The relevant provisions of the 2013 Courts Act (Zakon o sudovima, Official Gazette no. 28/13), which entered into force on 14 March 2013, read as follows:
PROTECTION OF THE RIGHT TO A HEARING WITHIN A REASONABLE TIME
Section 63
“A party to judicial proceedings which considers that the competent court did not decide within a reasonable time on its rights or obligations, or on a suspicion or accusation of a criminal offence, shall have the right to judicial protection in accordance with this Act.”
Section 64
“(1)  The legal remedies for protection of the right to a hearing within a reasonable time are:
a request for protection of the right to a hearing within a reasonable time,
a request for payment of appropriate compensation for the violation of the right to a hearing within a reasonable time.
(2)  In the proceedings for deciding the requests referred to in paragraph 1 of this section the rules of non-contentious procedure shall apply mutatis mutandis, and, in principle, no hearing shall be held.”
Section 65
“(1)  A request for protection of the right to a hearing within a reasonable time shall be lodged with the court before which the proceedings are pending.
(2)  The request shall be decided by the president of the court, unless he or she is the judge hearing the case, in which situation the request shall be decided by the vicepresident of the court.
(3)  The president of the court shall, within fifteen days of receipt of the request, ask the judge hearing the case [to submit] a report on the length of the proceedings, the reasons why [they] have not been concluded, and an opinion on the period [of time] within which the case may be decided. The president of the court may inspect the case file him or herself.
(4)  The judge hearing the case shall submit the report immediately, but no later than fifteen days from the date the president of the court has asked him or her to do so.
(5)  In deciding the request, the president of the court shall specifically take into account the type of the case, [its] factual and legal complexity, the conduct of the parties and the conduct of the court.
(6)  The president of the court shall decide the request within sixty days of receipt.”
Section 66
“(1)  If the president of the court finds the request well-founded, he or she shall specify a time-limit of, as [a general] rule, a maximum of six months within which the judge must decide the case, unless the circumstances of the case warrant a longer time-limit. The decision finding the request well-founded need not be reasoned and cannot be appealed against.
(2)  If the judge does not decide the case within the specified time-limit, he or she shall, within fifteen days of its expiry, submit a written report to the president of the court giving reasons for not having done so. The president of the court shall without delay forward the judge’s report and his or her [own] observations to the president of the immediately higher court and the Ministry of Justice.”
Section 67
“(1)  If the president of the court finds the request unfounded, he or she shall dismiss it by a decision against which the [requesting] party shall have the right to appeal within eight days of receipt of the decision.
(2)  The [requesting] party shall also have the right to appeal if the president of the court, within sixty days of receipt, does not decide the request.
(3)  The appeal shall be decided by the president of the immediately higher court. If the request relates to proceedings pending before the Supreme Court, the appeal shall be decided by a panel of three judges of that court. The president of the immediately higher court or the panel may dismiss the appeal as unfounded and uphold the firstinstance decision or reverse [that] decision.”
Section 68
“(1)  If the court does not decide the case referred to in section 65 of this Act within the specified time-limit, the [requesting] party may, within a further period of six months, lodge a request for payment of appropriate compensation for the violation of the right to a hearing within a reasonable time with the immediately higher court.
(2)  If the request relates to proceedings pending before the High Commercial Court, the High Administrative Court or the High Court for Administrative Offences, the request shall be decided by the Supreme Court.
(3)  The request referred to in paragraph 1 of this section shall be decided by a single judge.
(4)  If the request relates to proceedings pending before the Supreme Court, the request shall be decided by a panel of three judges of that court.
(5)  The immediately higher court shall decide the request within six months.”
Section 69
“(1)  The immediately higher court or the panel of the Supreme Court shall specify the time-limit within which the court before which the proceedings are pending must decide the case, and shall award [the requesting party] appropriate compensation for the violation of his or her right to a hearing within a reasonable time.
(2)  The total amount of appropriate compensation awarded in a single case may not exceed 35,000 Croatian kunas.
(3)  An appeal may be lodged with the Supreme Court within eight days against a decision on the request for payment of appropriate compensation for the violation of the right to a hearing within a reasonable time. The appeal shall be decided by a panel of three judges of that court, and, if the decision was given by the panel of the Supreme Court referred to in [section 68(4)] of this Act, the appeal shall be decided by a panel of five judges of that court.
(4)  The decision awarding appropriate compensation for the violation of the right to a hearing within a reasonable time shall immediately after becoming final be forwarded to the president of the court before which the violation of the right to a hearing within a reasonable time occurred, the president of the Supreme Court, and the Ministry of Justice.
(5)  The compensation referred to in paragraph 1 of this section shall be paid from the State budget.
(6)  If the case referred to in paragraph 1 of this section is not decided within the specified time-limit, the court president shall, within fifteen days, submit a written report to the president of the immediately higher court and the Ministry of Justice giving reasons for not having done so.”
Section 70
“If, before the European Court of Human Rights proceedings have been instituted for protection of the right to a hearing within a reasonable time and the Government’s representative before the European Court of Human Rights has requested information on the case from the [domestic] court before which the proceedings [complained of] are pending, that court shall inform the president of the immediately higher court, the president of the Supreme Court and the Ministry of Justice of the Government representative’s request and the reasons for the delay.”
Section 141
“Requests for protection of the right to a hearing within a reasonable time received before the entry into force of this Act shall be dealt with in accordance with the provisions of the 2005 Courts Act.”
The Constitutional Court, referring to its landmark decision in the applicant’s case, has applied the rules concerning the exhaustion of remedies established therein in its subsequent case-law. It has systematically examined the merits of constitutional complaints lodged under section 62 or 63 of the Constitutional Court Act alleging violations of the right to a hearing within a reasonable time if the complainants previously had recourse to other available length-of-proceedings remedies (either those under the 2005 Courts Act when that legislation was in force, or those under the 2013 Courts Act). Otherwise, it has consistently declared such constitutional complaints inadmissible if the complainants did not make use of the above-mentioned length-of-proceedings remedies.
By decision no. U-I-1553/2013 and others of 16 October 2018 (Official Gazette 99/18 of 9 November 2018) the Constitutional Court rejected a petition for (abstract) constitutional review and thus refused to review the constitutionality of sections 63 to 70 of the 2013 Courts Act, namely the provisions concerning the remedies for the excessive length of proceedings.
In the period between 15 March 2002 and 28 December 2005 a party to pending judicial proceedings in Croatia could have complained of their excessive length directly to the Constitutional Court by lodging a constitutional complaint under section 63 of the Constitutional Court Act (see paragraph 29 above). That provision, which is still in force, empowers that court, if it finds the constitutional complaint well-founded, both to expedite the proceedings complained of by ordering ordinary courts to deliver a decision within a specified time-limit, and to award compensation for any non-pecuniary damage sustained. The Court recognised that remedy as effective in terms of Article 13, which also meant that potential applicants had to use it in order to comply with the requirements of Article 35 § 1 of the Convention before lodging applications with the Court (see Slaviček v. Croatia (dec.), no. 20862/02, ECHR 2002VII).
In order to reduce the Constitutional Court’s workload as regards length-of-proceedings complaints, some of its powers in that regard were transferred to the ordinary courts following the entry into force of the 2005 Courts Act on 29 December 2005. From then on, litigants could complain of the excessive length of their pending judicial proceedings by lodging a “request for protection of the right to a hearing within a reasonable time” under sections 27 and 28 of the 2005 Courts Act with the court at the next level of jurisdiction. Like the Constitutional Court under the earlier system (see paragraph 33 above), the higher court could both accelerate the proceedings complained of by ordering the lower court to deliver a decision within a specified time-limit, and award compensation for any nonpecuniary damage sustained.
Under the original wording of the 2005 Courts Act, the Constitutional Court remained the authority of last resort, as litigants were entitled to lodge constitutional complaints against Supreme Court decisions adopted in proceedings instituted following their request for protection of the right to a hearing within a reasonable time. In addition, litigants could lodge a constitutional complaint under the relevant provisions of the Constitutional Court Act (see paragraph 29 above) in two limited situations:
- they could complain of the excessive length of the ongoing proceedings under section 63 of that Act if, at the time of lodging the constitutional complaint, their case was pending before the Supreme Court, and
- if the proceedings had ended, they could complain of the excessive length of those proceedings by lodging a constitutional complaint under section 62 of that Act within thirty days of the last judicial decision being served.
After the entry into force of the 2009 Amendments to the 2005 Courts Act on 29 December 2009, the case-law of the Constitutional Court developed so that it was no longer possible to lodge constitutional complaints under section 62 of the Constitutional Court Act against such decisions of the Supreme Court (see Vrtar v. Croatia, no. 39380/13, §§ 5456, 62-64 and 78, 7 January 2016). The constitutional complaint remained available in two limited situations described above (see the previous paragraph).
In the period between 29 December 2005 and 13 March 2013 a request for protection of the right to a hearing within a reasonable time under sections 27 and 28 of the 2005 Courts Act was recognised by the Court as an effective remedy under Article 13 of the Convention. This therefore meant that it had to be exhausted for the purposes of Article 35 § 1 before any complaints concerning the excessive length of judicial proceedings in Croatia were brought before the Court (see Pavić v. Croatia, no. 21846/08, § 36, 28 January 2010).
The relevant domestic law and practice concerning lengthofproceedings remedies in Croatia in the period between 29 December 2005 and 13 March 2013 is set out in detail in Vrtar (cited above, §§ 53-56 and 61-64).
The 2013 Courts Act, which entered into force on 14 March 2013, introduced a purely acceleratory remedy as the primary remedy (see paragraph 30 above). A combined compensatory and acceleratory remedy, identical to that under the previous legislation (see paragraph 34 above), was made available only in limited circumstances as a complementary remedy (see paragraph 41 below).
In particular, under the 2013 Courts Act a party to pending judicial proceedings who considers that those proceedings have been unduly protracted has the right to use a purely acceleratory remedy, namely a “request for protection of the right to a hearing within a reasonable time”, and to ask the president of the court before which those proceedings are pending to expedite them by setting a time-limit of a maximum of six months within which the judge hearing the case must give a decision (see sections 65 to 67 of the 2013 Courts Act, cited in paragraph 30 above).
A complementary remedy (combining compensatory and acceleratory elements), namely a “request for payment of appropriate compensation”, is available only in cases where the judge hearing the case did not comply with the time-limit for deciding the case specified by the court president when granting the request for the purely acceleratory remedy (see sections 68 and 69 of the 2013 Courts Act, cited in paragraph 30 above).