The case originated in an application (no. 67326/01) against the  lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Russian national, Mr Ruslan Olegovich Mezhidov (“the applicant”), on 15 November 2000.
The applicant was represented by lawyers from the Human Rights Centre Memorial (Moscow) and the European Human Rights Advocacy Centre (). The Russian Government (“the Government”) were represented first by Mr P. Laptev and then by Mrs V. Milinchuk, both former Representatives of the Russian Federation at the European Court of Human Rights.
The applicant alleged, in particular, a violation of Article 2 of the Convention on account of the killing of his relatives in an attack by federal troops and the failure of the domestic authorities to carry out an effective investigation into their deaths. He also complained about the absence of effective remedies in respect of those violations.
On 13 October 2004 the President of the First Section decided to grant priority to the application under Rule 41 of the Rules of Court.
By a decision of 21 September 2006, the Court declared the application partly admissible.
The applicant and the Government each filed further written observations (Rule 59 § 1).
The applicant was born in 1967 and lives in the village of .
The facts of the case as submitted by the parties are summarised in section A below (paragraphs 9-40). A description of the documents submitted by the Government is contained in section B below (paragraphs 41-42).
At the material time the applicant and his family lived in the , in the Nadterechny District of Chechnya. They had an apartment in a block of flats at . The applicant’s family consisted of his father, Oleg Semenovich Mezhidov, born in 1938, his mother, Movlmat Lemayevna Mezhidova, born in 1940, his brother, Bislan Olegovich Mezhidov, born in 1969, and his two sisters, Aminat Olegovna Mezhidova, born in 1973, and Svetlana Olegovna Mezhidova, born in 1985.
In early October 1999 the Russian Government launched a counterterrorist operation in the .
On 5 October 1999, between 7 and 9 p.m., the  came under fire. It appears that the applicant was absent from home at the time. His parents, brother and sisters tried to escape but were killed by a shell which burst in the courtyard of the building at .
According to the applicant, the village was shelled by artillery positioned on the Terskiy mountain range, where Russian troops were stationed. In his submission, a total of five to six shells had been fired during the attack. He submitted a sketch map of the scene of the incident indicating the shell craters. According to him, the position of the craters clearly indicated that the shells could only have been fired from the Terskiy mountain range. The applicant also submitted statements by two witnesses who had testified that the village had been shelled from the Terskiy mountain range and that they had seen the Russian forces stationed there.
According to the Government, the applicant’s family members died in an attack on the  carried out with unidentified firearms by unidentified men. They also suggested with reference to the information provided by the Prosecutor General’s Office of Russia and the Chechen Department of the Federal Security Service that “the Mezhidovs [had been] killed by members of illegal armed formations”.
On 24 November 1999 the Civil Registration Office of the Nadterechny District certified the deaths of the applicant’s relatives. The certificates stated that each of them had died of “multiple shrapnel wounds”. The date and the place of death were recorded as 5 October 1999, Znamenskoye.
According to the applicant, the courts and administrative institutions in the  ceased functioning when the hostilities began.
On 3 February 2000, when the local law-enforcement bodies became operational, the applicant asked the Nadterechny prosecutor’s office (прокуратура Надтеречного района) to investigate the deaths of his family members. The applicant submitted a copy of his application, which bears no stamp to show that it had been received by the authorities. In the applicant’s submission, no investigative measures were taken in connection with his application. Some time later he was informed by law-enforcement officials that on 5 October 1999 Znamenskoye had allegedly been shelled by Chechen fighters with 120 mm-calibre mortars.
On 22 June 2000 the applicant applied to the Special Envoy of the Russian President in  for Rights and Freedoms (Специальный представитель Президента Российской Федерации по соблюдению прав и свобод человека в Чеченской Республике), complaining about the killing of his relatives and the lack of an effective investigation. The Envoy assured the applicant that he would take up his case and advised him to lodge another application with the Nadterechny prosecutor’s office.
On 30 June 2000 the applicant again applied to the Nadterechny prosecutor’s office in writing. He restated the circumstances of his family members’ deaths and requested that an investigation be carried out. The applicant submitted a copy of his application, which bears no stamp to show that it had been received by the authorities. According to the Government, the applicant did not inform the law-enforcement authorities of the incident of 5 October 1999 until 3 July 2000.
According to the applicant, at some point he himself searched for and found fragments of shells at the scene of the incident in Znamenskoye and delivered them to the Nadterechny prosecutor’s office. It appears that an official of the Nadterechny prosecutor’s office sent the fragments for an expert examination.
On 9 August 2000 an expert examined thirty fragments collected at the scene of the incident in Znamenskoye and reported that they were pieces of large-calibre (122 mm and 152 mm) artillery shells. The applicant submitted a copy of this report. The Government made no comments as regards the results of the examination.
On 17 November 2000 criminal proceedings in connection with the death of the applicants’ relatives were instituted under Article 105 § 2 of the Russian Criminal Code (murder of two or more persons committed by a generally dangerous method). The case file was assigned the number 28026.
On 17 January 2001 the investigation was suspended, on the ground that it was not possible to establish who was responsible. This decision was set aside on 22 March 2001 and the proceedings were resumed.
According to the Government, the applicant was granted the status of victim of a crime on 12 April 2001. They did not submit a copy of that decision.
On 22 April 2001 the investigation was again adjourned.
In a letter of 28 May 2001 the Nadterechny prosecutor’s office notified the applicant that the criminal proceedings in case no. 28026 had been suspended, as it was impossible to identify those responsible. The letter further stated that the search for culprits was being continued.
It does not appear that any investigative activity took place between April 2001 and January 2005.
On 13 October 2004 the present application was communicated to the Russian Government.
On 19 January 2005 the criminal proceedings in case no. 28026 were re-opened, and then suspended on 19 February 2005 in the absence of those responsible.
On 10 November 2005 the Nadterechny prosecutor’s office resumed the investigation, stating that the decision of 19 February 2005 by which the investigation had been adjourned had been premature, as a number of necessary investigative actions had not been taken. The applicant was informed in writing of the resumption of the investigation on the same date.
On 10 December 2005 the investigation was suspended on the ground that it was not possible to establish the identity of the alleged perpetrators. The applicant was informed of this decision on the same date.
On 11 September 2006 the Nadterechny prosecutor’s office resumed the proceedings in case no. 28026, referring to the investigating authorities’ failure to take a number of necessary investigative actions. The applicant was informed of this decision in a letter of 11 September 2006.
In the period between 27 September and 3 October a number of decisions were taken granting the status of victim in case no. 28026 to several persons injured during the incident of 5 October 1999. When describing the circumstances of the incident, the decisions stated that “on 5 October 1999 approximately between 7 and 9 p.m. blocks of flats situated in Shosseynaya Street in the village of Znamenskoye [had come under fire] supposedly from federal artillery”.
On 11 October 2006 the investigation was suspended, and the applicant was informed of that decision in writing on the same date.
On 17 November 2006 the investigation was again re-opened.
Referring to the information provided by the Prosecutor General’s Office, the Government submitted that a criminal investigation into the deaths of the applicant’s relatives as a result of an attack “with unidentified weapon by unidentified persons” had been opened on 17 November 2000 and then repeatedly suspended and resumed. In their memorandum of 27 December 2006 they submitted that it was pending and was being supervised by the Prosecutor General’s Office. According to the Government, although a considerable number of investigative measures had been taken, the investigating authorities were unable to identify the culprits.
They further submitted that on 12 April 2001 the applicant had been granted the status of victim of a crime and questioned on the same date and subsequently on 2 January 2005 and 9 October 2006. The investigating authorities also questioned eighteen witnesses, including the applicant’s neighbours. According to the Government, some of the applicant’s neighbours testified that rebel fighters in possession of automatic firearms and grenade launchers had lived in the same block of flats as the Mezhidov family and that, before leaving on 5 October 1999, they had threatened the residents on account of their cooperation with the federal authorities. Shortly after the rebels’ departure there had been an explosion in the courtyard of the block of flats. The Government did not specify on what date witness statements had been obtained. According to the Government, it was impossible to find other witnesses in the case, but the search for them was currently under way.
In October 2004, when the application was communicated to them, the Government were invited to produce a copy of the investigation file in criminal case no. 28026 opened in connection with the incident of 5 October 1999 in the . Relying on information obtained from the Prosecutor General’s Office, the Government replied that the investigation was in progress and that the disclosure of the documents would be in violation of Article 161 of the Code of Criminal Procedure since the file contained information of a military nature and personal data concerning the witnesses. At the same time, the Government suggested that a Court delegation could have access to the file at the place where the preliminary investigation was being conducted, with the exception of “the documents [disclosing military information and personal data concerning the witnesses], and without the right to make copies of the case file and to transmit it to others”. In March 2005 the Court reiterated its request and suggested that Rule 33 § 3 of the Rules of Court be applied. In reply, the Government again refused to produce the investigation file for the aforementioned reasons.
On 21 September 2006 the application was declared partly admissible. At that stage the Court once again invited the Government to submit the investigation file and to provide information concerning the progress of the investigation. In December 2006 the Government informed the Court of the latest dates on which the investigation had been suspended and reopened and produced several documents pertaining to the period after November 2005. Overall, the Government produced 44 documents running to a total of 52 pages from the case file, which, as could be ascertained from the page numbering, comprised at least 314 pages. The documents included:
(a)  several procedural decisions taken after November 2005 suspending and reopening the investigation in case no. 28026;
(b)  a number of investigators’ decisions taking up case no. 28026;
(c)  a number of decisions on transfer of case no. 28026 from one investigator to another;
(d)  decisions granting the status of victims in case no. 28026 to several persons who were injured during the incident of 5 October 1999 in Znamenskoye, but not to the applicant;
(e)  letters for the period between November 2005 and October 2006 informing the applicant and the other victims of the suspension and reopening of the criminal proceedings in case no. 28026.
The Government did not submit any other documents.
Until 1 July 2002 criminal-law matters were governed by the 1960 Code of Criminal Procedure of the RSFSR. On 1 July 2002 the old Code was replaced by the Code of Criminal Procedure of the .
Article 125 of the new Code provides that the decision of an investigator or prosecutor to dispense with criminal proceedings or to terminate criminal proceedings, and other decisions and acts or omissions which are liable to infringe the constitutional rights and freedoms of the parties to criminal proceedings or to impede citizens’ access to justice may be appealed against to a district court, which is empowered to check the lawfulness and grounds of the impugned decisions.
Article 161 of the new Code enshrines the rule that data from the preliminary investigation may not be disclosed. Paragraph 3 of the same Article provides that information from the investigation file may be divulged with the permission of a prosecutor or investigator and only in so far as it does not infringe the rights and lawful interests of the participants in the criminal proceedings and does not prejudice the investigation. It is prohibited to divulge information about the private life of the participants in the criminal proceedings without their permission.