The case originated in an application (no. 40154/98) against the  lodged with the European Commission of Human Rights (“the Commission”) under former Article 25 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Turkish national, Mr Mehmet Emin Yüksel (“the applicant”), on 19 January 1998.
The applicant was represented by Mr M. S. Tanrıkulu, a lawyer practising in . The Turkish Government (“the Government”) did not designate an Agent for the purposes of the proceedings before the Convention institutions.
The applicant alleged under Article 3 that he had been subjected to various forms of illtreatment, which amounted to torture, during his detention in police custody. He further complained that he had no effective remedy in respect of his allegation of torture as required by Article 13 of the Convention. He finally contended that he had been denied the right to intervene in the criminal proceedings against the police officers in violation of Article 6 § 1.
The application was transmitted to the Court on 1 November 1998, when Protocol No. 11 to the Convention came into force (Article 5 § 2 of Protocol No. 11).
The application was allocated to the Second Section of the Court (Rule 52 § 1 of the Rules of Court). Within that Section, the Chamber that would consider the case (Article 27 § 1 of the Convention) was constituted as provided in Rule 26 § 1.
On 1 November 2001 the Court changed the composition of its Sections (Rule 25 § 1). This case was assigned to the newly composed Second Section (Rule 52 § 1).
By a decision of 2 December 2003, the Court declared the application partly admissible. It retained the applicant’s complaints concerning the alleged illtreatment in police custody and the lack of an effective remedy and declared the remainder of the application inadmissible.
The applicant and the Government each filed observations on the merits (Rule 59 § 1).
The applicant was born in 1972 and lives in . He was a student at the Medical Faculty of the  at the time of the events described below.
On 4 April 1997 the applicant was arrested and placed in custody by police officers from the Diyarbakır Security Directorate. He was accused of membership of an illegal organisation, the YEKBUN (Kurdistan United People’s Party).
The police officers interrogated the applicant in relation to his alleged involvement in the YEKBUN. The applicant alleged that he had been subjected to ill-treatment by the officers during the interrogation which caused an oedema, a bruised nose and a broken tooth. According to the Government, the applicant’s injuries occurred when, due to lack of sleep, he inadvertently fell and hit his nose on a sink.
On 6 April 1997 the applicant signed a statement according to which he hit his nose on a sink while washing his face. The applicant claims that he was forced to sign the statement. He was then taken to the  and examined by Dr. R.C. who noted the following:
“An oedema and an ecchymosed lesion as a result of trauma have been identified on the nose.
...”
On the same day, the applicant was brought before the . Before the court, he denied being a member of an illegal organisation. He stated that he had been subjected to various forms of illtreatment during his detention in police custody and that the statement which he had signed did not reflect the truth of what had happened to him. The court ordered his release pending trial.
On 8 April 1997 the applicant filed a criminal complaint with the chief public prosecutor’s office in  against the police officers who had allegedly ill-treated him. The chief public prosecutor ordered that the applicant be examined by a medical expert from the Forensic Medicine Institute. On the same day, he was examined by a forensic medical expert. The expert’s report stated the following:
“...
There is an abrasion of 1 x 0,5 cm on the left side of the tip of the nose.  Furthermore, there is a minimal fracture on the front of the 8th of the lower teeth.
There is no danger to the individual’s life. However, the injuries render him unfit for work for two days.”
On 15 April 1997 the  public prosecutor issued a decision of non-jurisdiction in respect of the applicant’s allegations of ill-treatment and referred the investigation file to the Diyarbakır District Administrative Council in accordance with the Law on the Prosecution of Civil Servants (Memurin Muhakematı Kanunu).
On 13 June 1997 the  acquitted the applicant of the charges against him. The court took note in its judgment of the applicant’s statement that he had been interrogated by police officers under duress.
On 26 June 1997 the Diyarbakır Administrative Council decided that, due to lack of evidence, the police officers who had allegedly illtreated the applicant should not be prosecuted.
On 6 August 1997 the applicant filed an objection with the  against the decision of the Diyarbakır Administrative Council. He also lodged a petition with the Diyarbakır Administrative Council and requested a copy of the investigation file. He received no response to his petition.
On 14 May 1999 the  confirmed the Administrative Council’s decision of non-prosecution.
On 26 July 1999 the ’s decision was served on the applicant.
A description of the relevant domestic law at the material time can be found in Batı and Others v. Turkey, nos. 33097/96 and 57834/00, § 96100, 3 June 2004, and Tahsin Acar v. Turkey [GC], no. 26307/95, § 186-197, 8 April 2004).