The case originated in an application (no. 35475/02) against the  lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Slovenian national, Mr David Geršak (“the applicant”), on 19 September 2002.
The applicant was represented by Verstovšek lawyers. The Slovenian Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Mr L. Bembič, State Attorney-General.
The applicant alleged under Article 6 § 1 of the Convention that the length of the proceedings before the domestic courts to which he was a party was excessive. In substance, he also complained about the lack of an effective domestic remedy in respect of the excessive length of the proceedings (Article 13 of the Convention).
On 9 June 2006 the Court decided to communicate the complaints concerning the length of the proceedings and the lack of remedies in that respect to the Government. Applying Article 29 § 3 of the Convention, it decided to examine the merits of the application at the same time as its admissibility.
The applicant was born in 1973 and lives in Velenje.
On 13 August 1996 the applicant was injured in a car accident. The person responsible for the accident had taken out insurance with the insurance company ZT.
On 29 December 1997 the applicant instituted civil proceedings against ZT in the Celje District Court (Okrožno sodišče v Celju) seeking damages in the amount of 14,330,442 Slovenian tolars (SIT) (approximately 62,000 euros) for the injuries sustained.
Between 1 July 1998 and 18 April 2000 the applicant made seven requests that a date be set for a hearing.
Between 20 October 1999 and 23 September 2002 he lodged eleven preliminary written submissions and/or adduced evidence.
On 21 September 2000 the court appointed four medical experts to prepare expert reports in the case.
Three hearings were held between 21 September 2000 and 17 October 2002.
On 17 October 2002 the court decided to deliver a written judgment. The judgment, upholding the applicant’s claim in part, was served on the applicant on 18 November 2002.
On 28 November 2002 the applicant appealed to the  (Višje sodišče v Celju) and requested that the first-instance court to correct its judgment.
On 8 July 2003 the first-instance court corrected its judgment as regards legal costs.
On 23 December 2004 the  delivered a judgment allowing the applicant’s appeal in part and amending the first-instance court’s judgment accordingly.
The judgment was served on the applicant on 10 January 2005.
On 19 January 2005 the applicant lodged an appeal on points of law with the Supreme Court (Vrhovno sodišče).
On 7 December 2006 the court delivered a judgment. It partly upheld the applicant’s appeal on points of law and changed the second-instance court’s judgment accordingly. The Supreme Court’s judgment was served on the applicant on 18 January 2007.
The Act on the Protection of the Right to a Trial without undue Delay (Zakon o varstvu pravice do sojenja brez nepotrebnega odlašanja, Official Journal, No. 49/2006) was enacted on 1 January 2007. Under sections 1 and 2 of the Act, the right to a trial within a reasonable time is guaranteed for a party to court proceedings, a participant under the Act governing non-contentious proceedings and an injured party in criminal proceedings.
Section 25 lays down the following transitional rules in relation to applications already pending before the Court:
Section 25 - Just satisfaction for damage sustained prior to implementation of this Act
“(1) In cases where a violation of the right to a trial without undue delay has already ceased and a party has filed a claim for just satisfaction with the international court before the date of implementation of this Act, the State Attorney’s Office shall offer the party a settlement of the amount of just satisfaction within four months of the date of receipt of the case referred by the international court for the settlement procedure. The party shall submit a settlement proposal to the State Attorney’s Office within two months of the date of receipt of the proposal of the State Attorney’s Office. The State Attorney’s Office shall decide on the proposal as soon as possible and within a period of four months at the latest. ...
(2) If the proposal for settlement referred to in paragraph 1 of this section is not acceded to or the State Attorney’s Office and the parties fail to negotiate an agreement within four months of the date on which the party made its proposal, the party may bring an action before the competent court under this Act. The party may bring an action within six months of receiving the State Attorney’s Office reply that the party’s proposal referred to in the previous paragraph has not been acceded to, or after the expiry of the period fixed in the previous paragraph for the State Attorney’s Office to decide to proceed with settlement. Irrespective of the type or amount of the claim, the provisions of the Civil Procedure Act concerning small claims shall apply in proceedings before a court.”