The case originated in an application (no. 39747/10) against the Russian Federation lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Russian national, Mr Timur Vladislavovich Voynov (“the applicant”), on 11 June 2010.
The applicant was represented by Mr E. Markov, a lawyer practising in Budapest. The Russian Government (“the Government”) were represented by Mr G. Matyushkin, Representative of the Russian Federation to the European Court of Human Rights, and then by his successor in that office, Mr M. Galperin.
The applicant alleged, in particular, that his right to respect for family life had been violated on account of the Russian authorities’ decisions on his allocation to a post-conviction detention facility. He also complained of the lack of effective remedies available at the national level.
On 15 April 2015 the complaints under Articles 8 and 13 of the Convention were communicated to the Government and the remainder of the application was declared inadmissible pursuant to Rule 54 § 3 of the Rules of Court.
The applicant was born in 1985 and lives in Oryol. He is currently serving his sentence in IK-7 in the village of Areyskoye, Krasnoyarsk Region.
The applicant, his partner and his mother were living in Oryol when the applicant was charged with drug-related crimes.
On 2 December 2009 the Federal Penal Authority (“Федеральная служба исполнения наказаний”, “the FSIN”) of Russia sent a telegram to the FSIN department for the Oryol Region (“the Oryol FSIN”) instructing the latter to send each month up to forty people detained in remand prisons and sentenced to a term of imprisonment in a strict-regime facility to the Krasnoyarsk Region. The instruction was valid as of 1 December 2009 until further notice.
On 7 December 2009 the Sovetskiy District Court of Oryol convicted the applicant of drug-related crimes and sentenced him to twelve years’ imprisonment in a strict-regime post-conviction detention facility. On 2 February 2010 the Oryol Regional Court upheld the conviction on appeal.
Acting on the basis of the FSIN of Russia’s instruction of 2 December 2009, on an unspecified date the Oryol FSIN decided, in view of the overcrowding in the postconviction detention facilities in the Oryol Region, that the issue of which particular facility the applicant would be transferred to should be resolved by the FSIN department for the Krasnoyarsk Region (“the Krasnoyarsk FSIN”). The latter allocated the applicant to IK-7, a strict-regime post-conviction detention facility in the village of Areyskoye, Krasnoyarsk Region (about 4,200 km from Oryol), to serve his sentence. The applicant has been detained there since 20 April 2010.
The applicant has repeatedly asked the penal authorities at different levels to transfer him to a detention facility located closer to Oryol so that he could effectively maintain family ties while serving his sentence.
On 12 November 2010 the FSIN of Russia rejected the applicant’s request, informing him that, under Article 81 of the Code on the Execution of Sentences (“the CES”), in the absence of exceptional circumstances convicts were to serve their prison term in its entirety in the same detention facility, and that there were no such exceptional circumstances in the applicant’s case. They noted as follows:
“[a]s regards maintaining the convict’s social ties, the right to receive visits and parcels as well as the right to correspondence and phone calls should be realised in accordance with the laws on execution of sentences in force and does not depend on the place in which he is serving the sentence.”
The applicant brought civil proceedings against the Oryol FSIN, claiming compensation for pecuniary and nonpecuniary damage caused by their decision to transfer him to a penal facility in the Krasnoyarsk Region in breach of his right, under Article 73 § 1 of the CES, to serve his prison sentence in his home region, which had adversely affected his capacity to maintain his family and social ties.
On 3 August 2012 the Zavodskoy District Court of Oryol dismissed the claims for damages with reference to Article 73 § 2 of the CES and Ruling No. 1700-O-O of the Constitutional Court of Russia. The court held that the Oryol FSIN’s decision had been lawful because between December 2009 and February 2010 the penal facilities in the Oryol Region had been overcrowded. It also noted that the defendant had acted in accordance with the FSIN of Russia’s instructions. The court did not address the applicant’s argument regarding his difficulties in maintaining family ties because of the distance between his family home and the detention facility. It appears that the applicant did not appeal against the judgment.
Between July 2011 and October 2013 the applicant’s partner made long-term family visits to IK-7 on six occasions. In 2014 she gave birth to the couple’s daughter. While in IK-7, the applicant received a number of parcels and phone calls from his mother and partner.
Article 15 § 4 of the Constitution of the Russian Federation reads as follows:
“4.  Universally recognised principles and norms of international law and international treaties of the Russian Federation form a constituent part of its legal system. Where an international treaty of the Russian Federation sets rules that are distinct from those established by [domestic] law, the rules of the international treaty shall prevail.”
The provisions of Chapter 25 of the Russian Code of Civil Procedure (“CCP”) (repealed as of 15 September 2015) were summarised, in particular, in Roman Zakharov v. Russia [GC], no. 47143/06, §§ 92-100, ECHR 2015).
The domestic law and practice governing the geographic distribution of prisoners, as well as the relevant Council of Europe documents, were summarised in Polyakova and Others v. Russia (nos. 35090/09 and 3 others, §§ 44-59, 7 March 2017).
More recently, the Constitutional Court of Russia dismissed as inadmissible an application lodged by a convicted prisoner, A., contesting the constitutionality of Articles 73 § 4 and 81 § 2 of the CES as violating the right of prisoners and their families to respect for family life. Its Ruling No. 599-O of 28 March 2017 reads, in so far as relevant, as follows:
“Article 55 § 3 of the Constitution of the Russian Federation provides for a possibility to impose restrictions on human rights by federal law as a means of defending the foundations of the constitutional order, and the morals, health, rights and lawful interests of others, and of ensuring the country’s defence and State security. Such restrictions, in particular, may be related to imposing on people who have committed a crime a criminal penalty as a measure of State coercion ...
...
Setting deprivation of liberty as one of the measures of punishment, the State acts in its own interests as well as in those of society and its members. Serving such punishment changes the usual rhythm of life of a person [and] his relations with people surrounding him and has certain moral and psychological consequences, thus limiting not only his rights and freedoms as a citizen, but [also] his rights as a person. This is connected with the unlawful behaviour of a culprit and is conditioned by the need to restrict his natural right to liberty with a view to defending the morals, rights and lawful interests of others.
...
The rules of [Article 73 § 4 of the CES] are aimed at individualisation of punishment and differentiation of the conditions under which a sentence is served, taking into account the nature of the crime, its dangerousness ... intensity, causes and other circumstances in which it has been committed, as well as information regarding the person who has committed it. They thus create grounds for achieving the aims of punishment ... [such as] restitution of social justice, correction of the convict and prevention of the commission of new crimes.
At the same time, pursuant to point 8 of the [Ministry of Justice’s Instruction on Allocation of Prisoners] ... those convicted for the crimes listed in Article 73 § 3 of the CES ... shall as a rule be sent to serve their sentence within the [territory of a] subject of the Russian Federation where they have been sentenced; if it is impossible to detain such people where they have been sentenced, they shall be sent to serve their sentence in another subject of the Russian Federation by decision of the FSIN of Russia ...
Accordingly, the legal provisions in force do not imply that the place where a convict will serve his sentence is determined arbitrarily. They correspond to the international legal norms, in particular, the European Prison Rules 2006, under which detainees should where possible be sent to serve their sentence at penal facilities located in the vicinity of their home or places of social rehabilitation. [The international legal norms] are recommendatory in character and should be implemented subject to the availability of the requisite economic and social opportunities ...
...
The rules [of Article 81 § 2 of the CES] have been set by the legislator within its powers, do not exceed the limits of constitutionally permissible restrictions on the rights and freedoms of citizens. [They] correspond to the principles of differentiation and individualisation of serving sentences, the rational application of measures of coercion and means of correction of convicts.
Therefore the contested norms may not be regarded as violating the applicant’s rights, and his application does not meet the criterion of admissibility and may not be accepted by the Constitutional Court of the Russian Federation for examination.”