The case concerns the method of implementation of a blocking order targeting extremist content which had the effect of blocking access to the applicant’s entire website.
The applicant was born in 1978 and lives in Bryansk. He had been granted legal aid and was represented by Mr O. Anishchik, a lawyer practising in St Petersburg.
The Government were represented by Mr M. Galperin, Representative of the Russian Federation to the European Court of Human Rights.
The facts of the case, as submitted by the parties, may be summarised as follows.
The applicant is the owner and administrator of the website “Worldview of the Russian Civilization” (www.razumei.ru). In November 2013, he discovered that the local Internet service provider (ISP) had blocked access to his website on the basis of a judgment by the Kirovskiy District Court in Rostov-on-Don dated 3 April 2012.
As it transpired, in late 2011 the Rostov Regional prosecutor had brought a public-interest claim against a regional ISP. The prosecutor claimed that, by using the provider-facilitated connection to the Internet, he had been able to access a particular pamphlet and an electronic book (“the e-book”), both of which had been previously categorised as extremist publications. One copy of the e-book in PDF format was accessible, in particular, in the files section of the applicant’s website. The prosecutor asked the Kirovskiy District Court to block access to the publications “by adding filter rules for the websites’ IP addresses to the area border router” («путем добавления на пограничном маршрутизаторе правил фильтрации IP-адресов указанных сайтов»), that is to say, by way of blocking access to the websites by their numerical network addresses (“IP address”). Referring to the provisions of the Suppression of Extremism Act and section 10(1) and (6) of the Information Act, the Kirovskiy District Court required the ISP to block access to the applicant’s website using the formulation of the blocking measure which the prosecutor had suggested.
Immediately upon finding out about the Kirovskiy District Court’s judgment, the applicant deleted the offending e-book and brought proceedings against the ISP, seeking to have access to his website restored. On 25 March 2014 the Savelovskiy District Court in Moscow granted the claim, noting that the extremist material had been removed. That decision was overturned on appeal: on 14 August 2014 the Moscow City Court held that the Kirovskiy District Court’s judgment had required the ISP “to block access to the website’s IP address, rather than to a specific page of the website” and that it would be contrary to the terms of that judgment to grant the applicant’s claim. On 5 December 2014 and 5 March 2015 the City Court and the Supreme Court, respectively, refused the applicant leave to appeal to the cassation instance.
In the meantime, the applicant asked the Kirovskiy District Court to fix a new time-limit for lodging an appeal against the 2012 judgment. On 9 December 2014 the Kirovskiy District Court acceded to his request. Referring to the Constitutional Court’s case-law, it noted that the proceedings could not be considered fair if the judgment determined the rights and obligations of, or imposed new restrictions on, persons who had not taken part in the proceedings.
In his statement of appeal, the applicant pointed out that as he had been unaware of the original blocking proceedings, he had been unable to defend his rights. In the meantime, the proscribed e-book had been removed. In evidence, he enclosed a copy of the Savelovskiy District Court’s judgment and a printout from his website.
On 29 January 2015 the Rostov Regional Court dismissed the appeal. It found that the 2012 judgment could not be set aside on the grounds that the applicant had not been able to join the proceedings because the prosecutor had lodged a claim against the ISP, rather than against him. Without examining the applicant’s evidence, the Regional Court held that it had not been shown that the offending e-book had been removed. On 15 June and 5 October 2015 the Regional Court and the Supreme Court, respectively, refused the applicant leave to appeal to the cassation instance.
Section 2 defines the basic terms as follows:
“(13) ’Internet site’ is an aggregate of computer software and other content ... which can be accessed ... by its domain name or its network address ...
(14) ’page of an Internet site (webpage)’ is a part of an Internet site which can be accessed by its reference made up of the domain name and additional characters ...”.
Section 10 provides that information may be freely disseminated in the Russian Federation subject to the requirements of Russian legislation (subsection (1)). The dissemination of information which may not be disseminated under penalty of criminal or administrative sanction is prohibited (subsection (6)).
By a judgment of 10 May 2011 (case no. 58-Vpr11-2), the Supreme Court of the Russian Federation reversed judgments rendered by the lower courts on a prosecutor’s public-interest claim against an ISP. The prosecutor had sought a court order blocking access to a particular website, two pages of which contained documentation of a prohibited political party, by means of “adding filter rules for the website’s IP address to the area border router”. The lower courts at two instances had dismissed the prosecutor’s claim, having found that the ISP had no technical means of blocking access to individual pages of the website and that there were no legal grounds for blocking access to the entire website. The Supreme Court disagreed. It held that the ISP was bound, under section 10(6) of the Information Act, to block the dissemination of extremist content. In so far as it had a technical possibility to enforce the wholesale blocking of the website’s IP address by defining filter rules at the area border router, the ISP should have used that method to block access to the website.
On 13 March 2012 the Sakhalin Regional Court reversed a judgment by the Town Court dismissing a town prosecutor’s claim against an ISP (case no. 33-630/2012). The prosecutor had sought a court order blocking access to a website containing an extremist film. The Town Court had held that, in the absence of evidence that no content other than the prohibited film was housed at that IP address, blocking access to the website’s IP address could breach the users’ right to freedom of access to legitimate content. The Regional Court reiterated the Supreme Court’s arguments and remitted the matter to the Town Court, requiring it to examine whether access to the website could be blocked by filtering its IP address at the area border router.
On 17 November 2014 the Rostov Regional Court upheld a judgment by the District Court dismissing a district prosecutor’s claim seeking to have one page of an extremist publication blocked “by way of filtering the website’s IP address at the area border router” (case no. 3315382/2014). The District Court had refused the claim on the grounds that filtering the website’s IP address would restrict access to the entire website, rather than to a page of the website.
As of April 2020, an online database of judicial decisions (www.sudact.ru) listed over 12,000 judgments in which Russian courts had blocked access to online content “by way of filtering the website’s IP address at the area border router”. Between 2017 and 2019, one court, the Promyshlennyy District Court in the Stavropol Region, issued as many as 222 blocking decisions in which that formula was used.
The Declaration on freedom of communication on the Internet, adopted by the Council of Europe’s Committee of Ministers on 28 May 2003, took note of the Member States’ commitment to abide by the following principles in the field of communication on the Internet:
Principle 3: Absence of prior state control
“Public authorities should not, through general blocking or filtering measures, deny access by the public to information and other communication on the Internet, regardless of frontiers. This does not prevent the installation of filters for the protection of minors, in particular in places accessible to them, such as schools or libraries.
Provided that the safeguards of Article 10, paragraph 2, of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms are respected, measures may be taken to enforce the removal of clearly identifiable Internet content or, alternatively, the blockage of access to it, if the competent national authorities have taken a provisional or final decision on its illegality.”
The 2011  (A/HRC/17/27) expressed concerns about the excessive scope of blocking measures:
“29.  Blocking refers to measures taken to prevent certain content from reaching an end user. This includes preventing users from accessing specific websites, Internet Protocol (IP) addresses, domain name extensions, the taking down of websites from the web server where they are hosted, or using filtering technologies to exclude pages containing keywords or other specific content from appearing ...
States’ use of blocking or filtering technologies is frequently in violation of their obligation to guarantee the right to freedom of expression ... Firstly, the specific conditions that justify blocking are not established in law, or are provided by law but in an overly broad and vague manner, which risks content being blocked arbitrarily and excessively. Secondly, blocking is not justified to pursue aims which are listed under article 19, paragraph 3, of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, and blocking lists are generally kept secret, which makes it difficult to assess whether access to content is being restricted for a legitimate purpose. Thirdly, even where justification is provided, blocking measures constitute an unnecessary or disproportionate means to achieve the purported aim, as they are often not sufficiently targeted and render a wide range of content inaccessible beyond that which has been deemed illegal. Lastly, content is frequently blocked without the intervention of or possibility for review by a judicial or independent body ...”
The , adopted on 1 June 2011 by the UN Special Rapporteur on Freedom of Opinion and Expression, the Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe Representative on Freedom of the Media, the Organization of American States Special Rapporteur on Freedom of Expression, and the African Commission on Human and Peoples’ Rights Special Rapporteur on Freedom of Expression and Access to Information, provides in particular:
General Principles
“a. Freedom of expression applies to the Internet, as it does to all means of communication. Restrictions on freedom of expression on the Internet are only acceptable if they comply with established international standards, including that they are provided for by law, and that they are necessary to protect an interest which is recognised under international law (the ‘three-part’ test) ...”
Filtering and Blocking
“a. Mandatory blocking of entire websites, IP addresses, ports, network protocols or types of uses (such as social networking) is an extreme measure – analogous to banning a newspaper or broadcaster – which can only be justified in accordance with international standards, for example where necessary to protect children against sexual abuse.”
In  (CCPR/C/GC/34), adopted at its 102nd session (11-29 July 2011), the United Nations Human Rights Committee stated as follows:
“42.  The penalization of a media outlet, publishers or journalist solely for being critical of the government or the political social system espoused by the government can never be considered to be a necessary restriction of freedom of expression.
Any restrictions on the operation of websites, blogs or any other Internet-based, electronic or other such information-dissemination system, including systems to support such communication, such as Internet service providers or search engines, are only permissible to the extent that they are compatible with paragraph 3 [of Article 19]. Permissible restrictions generally should be content-specific; generic bans on the operation of certain sites and systems are not compatible with paragraph 3. It is also inconsistent with paragraph 3 to prohibit a site or an information dissemination system from publishing material solely on the basis that it may be critical of the government or the political social system espoused by the government.”
Recommendation CM/Rec(2016)5 of the Committee of Ministers to member States on Internet freedom, adopted by the Committee of Ministers of the Council of Europe on 13 April 2016, recommended that member States be guided by, and promote, specific Internet freedom indicators when participating in international dialogue and international policy making on Internet freedom. When adopting this recommendation, the Permanent Representative of the Russian Federation indicated that, in accordance with Article 10.2c of the Rules of Procedure for the meetings of the Ministers’ Deputies, he reserved the right of his Government to comply or not with the recommendation, in so far as it referred to the methodology for its implementation at national level. Section 2.2 of the Internet freedom indicators, “Freedom of opinion and the right to receive and impart information”, reads:
“2.2.1.  Any measure taken by State authorities or private-sector actors to block or otherwise restrict access to an entire Internet platform (social media, social networks, blogs or any other website) or information and communication technologies (ICT) tools (instant messaging or other applications), or any request by State authorities to carry out such actions complies with the conditions of Article 10 of the Convention regarding the legality, legitimacy and proportionality of restrictions.
2.2.  Any measure taken by State authorities or private-sector actors to block, filter or remove Internet content, or any request by State authorities to carry out such actions complies with the conditions of Article 10 of the Convention regarding the legality, legitimacy and proportionality of restrictions.
2.3.  Internet service providers as a general rule treat Internet traffic equally and without discrimination on the basis of sender, receiver, content, application, service or device. Internet traffic management measures are transparent, necessary and proportionate to achieve overriding public interests in compliance with Article 10 of the ECHR.
2.4.  Internet users or other interested parties have access to a court in compliance with Article 6 of the Convention with regard to any action taken to restrict their access to the Internet or their ability to receive and impart content or information.
2.5.  The State provides information in a timely and appropriate manner to the public about restrictions it applies to the freedom to receive and impart information, such as indicating websites that have been blocked or from which information was removed, including details of the legal basis, necessity and justification for such restrictions, the court order authorising them and the right to appeal.”