The case originated in 20 applications against  lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by Ukrainian nationals, except for the applicant in application no. 64583/09, who is a Russian national. Their personal details are set out in the appended table (“the applicants”).
The Ukrainian Government (“the Government”) are represented by their Agent, Mr Nazar Kulchytskyy.
On 4 February 2013 the Russian Government informed the Court that they did not wish to exercise their right under Article 36 § 1 of the Convention to intervene in the Court’s proceedings concerning the above application.
The applications, which mainly concern the issues of lengthy failure to enforce domestic decisions given in the applicants’ favour, were communicated to the Government on various dates.
On various dates the Government submitted to the Court a number of unilateral declarations aimed at resolving the non-enforcement issues. The Government requested the Court to strike the applications concerned out of the list of cases pursuant to Article 37 § 1 (c) of the Convention on the basis of the declarations. The Court examined the declarations and decided to reject the Government’s request.
On the dates set out in the appended tables domestic courts delivered judgments according to which the applicants were entitled to various pecuniary amounts or to have certain actions taken in their favour. The judgments became final and enforceable. However, the applicants were unable to obtain the enforcement of the decisions in due time because of the authorities’ failure to take specific budgetary or regulatory measures, because of the introduction of bans on the attachment and sale of property belonging to State-owned or controlled companies.
With the exception of applications no. 25358/06, 1777/08, 20895/09 and 64583/09 in which the judgment in the applicant’s favour was enforced on 2 June 2011, 18 April 2008, 9 July 2009 and on 18 January 2011 the domestic decisions in all other applications have not been enforced in full.
Some of the applicants also made submissions concerning factual and legal matters unrelated to the above non-enforcement issues.