The case originated in an application (no. 12739/05) against the  lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Bulgarian national, Ms Koprinka Petkova GoranovaKaraeneva (“the applicant”), on 22 March 2005.
The applicant was represented by Mr M. Ekimdzhiev and Ms K. Boncheva, lawyers practising in . The Bulgarian Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Ms M. Kotseva, of the Ministry of Justice.
The applicant alleged, in particular, that she had been subjected to covert surveillance in breach of the requirements of Article 8 of the Convention and that she had not had effective remedies in that respect.
On 10 September 2009 the President of the Fifth Section decided to give the Government notice of the complaints concerning the covert surveillance and the alleged lack of effective remedies in that respect. It was also decided to rule on the admissibility and merits of the application at the same time (Article 29 § 1 of the Convention).
The application was later transferred to the Fourth Section of the Court, following the recomposition of Court's sections on 1 February 2011.
The applicant was born in 1952 and lives in . At the material time she was employed as a neurologist at  and was on occasion called upon to act as a courtappointed expert.
On 9 January 2001 the Montana police were tipped off that the applicant, while acting as an expert appointed by the Montana Regional Court to draw up a report in connection with a civil claim brought by a Ms A.G. against her employer, had asked Ms A.G. to pay her money in exchange for her drawing up a report corroborating her claim. The next day, 10 January 2001, the police requested the  (Окръжен съд Монтана) to issue a warrant allowing them to install covert listening devices in the applicant's office in the hospital and in her private practice, and secretly to mark banknotes which Ms A.G. would hand to the applicant. On 10 January 2001 the court's president, exercising his powers under section 15 of the 1997 Special Surveillance Means Act (see paragraph 22 below), issued a warrant, specifying that the covert surveillance was not to exceed thirty days. The warrant did not mention the applicant's name or the registration number of the request; however, both the request and the warrant bore the number under which the request had been registered at the court. On 11 January 2001 the  police informed the chief secretary of the Ministry of Internal Affairs about the warrant by telephone and at 6.30 p.m. the same day received instructions from him to start the covert operation. The next day, 12 January 2001, the Minister of Internal Affairs also gave his written approval.
The technical department of the Ministry of Internal Affairs then installed the listening devices. At about 3 p.m. on 15 January 2001 Ms A.G. met with the applicant in front of and then inside her private practice. Their conversation was surreptitiously recorded. Ms A.G. handed the applicant two banknotes which had previously been marked by the police with a special material which glowed under ultraviolet light. Immediately after that the police searched the premises and found the two banknotes in the applicant's purse and seized them. They were later tested by a police expert.
The same day, 15 January 2001, the Montana District Prosecutor's Office charged the applicant with bribetaking.
On 7 February 2001 the three officers of the Ministry's technical department who had carried out the surveillance drew up a transcript of the audio recording which they had made on 15 January 2001. The transcript said that the recording had started at 2.30 p.m., but did not mention when it had ended. They also made a copy of the audio recording, from the original cassette onto a second one. One of the copies of the transcript was sent, along with the first cassette, to the . The second copy of the transcript and the other cassette were sent to the  police.
On 21 May 2002 the prosecuting authorities submitted an indictment against the applicant to the Montana District Court (Районен съд Монтана). On 17 June 2002 the judge-rapporteur at the Montana District Court set the case down for trial. However, at the first hearing, held on 17 October 2002, the court, noting that the indictment had not been drawn up properly, referred the case back to the prosecuting authorities.
On 27 December 2002 the  District Prosecutor's Office resubmitted the indictment.
On 9 February 2003 the judge-rapporteur at the Montana District Court set the case down for trial. Hearings were held on 27 March and 5 June 2003. On the latter date the court, noting that as a result of an intervening amendment to the 1974 Code of Criminal Procedure cases concerning bribetaking became triable by regional courts, discontinued the proceedings and sent the case to the Montana Regional Prosecutor's Office.
However, following a further amendment to the Code of Criminal Procedure providing that pending cases were to be completed under the old jurisdictional rules, on 25 June 2003 the Montana Regional Prosecutor's Office sent the case back to the Montana District Court, and on 21 July 2003 the court decided to resume the trial. It held hearings on 16 October and 10 November 2003. The applicant was able to acquaint herself with the material obtained through the covert listening devices and listen to the audio recording, which was played in the courtroom. At both hearings counsel for the applicant objected to the admission in evidence of, inter alia, the material obtained through the covert listening devices. The court rejected the objections and decided to admit that material in evidence. In her closing speech counsel for the applicant reiterated the objections, pointing out that the surveillance warrant did not contain a reference to the number of the request, and that the transcript of the audio recording did not mention the time when the surveillance had come to an end, which had made it possible to manipulate the transcript and present the words spoken by the applicant out of context.
In a judgment of 10 November 2003 the Montana District Court found the applicant guilty of aggravated bribetaking, contrary to Article 305, read in conjunction with Articles 301 § 1 and 302 of the Criminal Code (see paragraph 33 below). It sentenced her to three years' imprisonment, suspended, and barred her from being a courtappointed expert for three years. It found that instead of examining Ms A.G. in the hospital, she had invited her to her private practice and had asked her to pay her money in exchange for a favourable expert report.
The court based its findings of fact on, among other evidence, the testimony of Ms A.G. and her husband, the search conducted by the police on 15 January 2001, the evidence gathered through the covert listening device in the applicant's private practice, and two expert reports drawn up by a police expert and showing that the applicant had touched the marked banknotes that she received from Ms A.G.
The court went on to analyse in detail the applicant's objections against the admission of various items in evidence. It held, inter alia, that the failure of the judge who had issued the surveillance warrant to mention the number of the request was not a problem, because neither the 1997 Special Surveillance Means Act nor the 1974 Code of Criminal Procedure required that. The failure to refer, in the transcript of the audio recording, to the request for the use of special surveillance means, the surveillance warrant or the Minister's decision authorising their use, or to specify in the transcript the time when the recording had ended, were not in breach of the statutory requirements either, and the procedure followed by the authorities to obtain permission for the covert recording and to carry it out had been proper. The transcript fully complied with the applicable rules, and there was no indication that phrases spoken by the applicant or Ms A.G. had been taken out of context. Both of them had heard the recording during the trial, and had stated that the voices in the recording had been theirs and that the recorded phrases had been spoken by them. The expert reports had been prepared in line with the relevant statutory and regulatory requirements, and there were no grounds to disqualify the expert who had drawn them up. Her conclusions had been based on the presence of a special material produced by the technical services of the Ministry of Internal Affairs on the applicant's hands and on the two banknotes. The composition of that material, which was not being used in any other domain, was secret.
On 24 November 2003 the applicant appealed against her conviction and sentence. She reiterated her objections against the admission of the evidence obtained through the covert listening devices, and argued that the reasons given by the district court for rejecting her objections in that respect were erroneous. She also impugned the expert's refusal to disclose the exact composition of the material used to mark the banknotes, and argued that the expert was not impartial because she worked for the regional directorate of the Ministry of Internal Affairs – the very body which had sought permission to use special surveillance means against the applicant and whose officers had marked the banknotes.
The  heard the appeal on 26 January 2004, and on 2 February 2004 upheld the applicant's conviction, but reduced her sentence to one and a half years, suspended. In the reasons for its judgment it stated, among other things, that it fully agreed with the detailed and comprehensive reasons given by the district court to reject the applicant's objections against the admission of certain items in evidence. It went on to say that the failure of the judge who had issued the surveillance warrant to mention the number of the request was not sufficient to taint the evidence obtained through the covert listening devices.
On 2 March 2004 the applicant appealed on points of law. She reiterated her arguments in relation to the evidence obtained through the covert listening devices and the expert evidence, and argued that the regional court had failed to give sufficient reasons for its judgment and to address key arguments relating to the wrongful admission of evidence.
The Supreme Court of Cassation (Върховен касационен съд) heard the appeal on 13 October 2004 and dismissed it on 28 December 2004 (реш. № 644 от 28 декември 2004 по н. д. № 229/2004 г., ВКС, ІІ н. о.). It noted that the applicant's arguments were the same as those that she had raised before the lower courts. The fact that the regional court's reasons were not detailed was not a problem, because it had stated that it fully agreed with the reasons given by the district court. It also held that the evidence against the applicant had been properly admitted. There had been no serious breaches of the 1997 Special Surveillance Means Act or the 1974 Code of Criminal Procedure in relation to the use of covert listening devices. The applicant had been fully acquainted with the material obtained through the use of those devices and had recognised her own voice. The failure to mention the number of the request for use of special surveillance means and to include in the transcript the exact time at which the surveillance had ended were mere technical errors which could not affect the validity of the evidence obtained through the use of such means. The court went on to say that the expert's reports were comprehensive and complete, that they had not been the only evidence proving the applicant's guilt, and that there had been no grounds to disqualify the expert.
A description of the relevant provisions of the 1991 Constitution, the 1974 and 2005 Codes of Criminal Procedure, the 1997 Special Surveillance Means Act (Закон за специалните разузнавателни средства), the 2002 Classified Information Act (Закон за защита на класифицираната информация), the case-law of the domestic courts and other relevant material can be found in paragraphs 750 of the Court's judgment in Association for European Integration and Human Rights and Ekimdzhiev v. Bulgaria (no. 62540/00, 28 June 2007).
It should in particular be mentioned that under Article 111c of the 1974 Code, if material obtained through covert surveillance was to be used as evidence in criminal proceedings, it had to be reproduced in two copies, one of which was to be handed in a sealed package to the judge who had issued the surveillance warrant within twentyfour hours of being prepared. Article 113a provided that audio recordings and similar material made in connection with criminal proceedings, with the exception of material under Article 111c, was initially to be kept by the Ministry of Internal Affairs and then handed to the investigating and prosecuting authorities and the courts.
Article 111 § 5 of the 1974 Code provided that, in the event of criminal proceedings, the material obtained through covert surveillance was to be included in the case file. Section 31(2) of the 1997 Special Surveillance Means Act provides that after the opening of criminal proceedings, that material is to be kept by the judicial authorities.
Following the Court's judgment in Association for European Integration and Human Rights and Ekimdzhiev (cited above), on 14 October 2008 the Government laid before Parliament a bill for the amendment of the 1997 Special Surveillance Means Act. The explanatory notes to the bill referred to the abovementioned judgment and to the need to bring the Act in line with the requirements of the Convention. The bill was enacted on 15 December 2008 and came into force on 27 December 2008. Along with a host of other changes, the amendment created a National Bureau for Control over Special Surveillance Means (Национално бюро за контрол на специалните разузнавателни средства), an independent body whose task was to oversee the services authorised to use such means.
On 22 October 2009 Parliament adopted further amendments to the Act, abolishing the Bureau and replacing it with a special parliamentary commission. Those amendments came into force on 10 November 2009.
At the relevant time and until November 2004 the storage of evidence in the courts was governed by Regulation no. 28 of 1995 on the functions of the employees in the registries and the auxiliary services of the district, regional and military courts and courts of appeal (Наредба № 28 от 20 март 1995 г. за функциите на служителите в помощните звена и канцелариите на районните, окръжните, военните и апелативните съдилища). Under regulation 79(2), it was to be handed to an officer of the court designated by the court's president, who had to certify that he or she had received it. Under regulation 79(4), documents were sealed in envelopes and other items attached to a piece of cardboard. Regulation 80(2) provided that when items were taken in connection with the examination of cases, they had to be returned to the storage officer immediately after use. Evidence was to be sent to a higher court only if requested (regulation 80(3)) and could not be used for any nonevidentiary purposes (regulation 81(3)). Its proper storage was to be checked annually by a commission consisting of a judge, the court's registrar and a court officer (regulation 81(1) and (2)). Files of completed cases were to be sent to the court's archives not later than the end of June of the year following the one during which they had been completed (regulation 85(1)). District court cases were to be kept for five years and regional court cases for ten years (regulation 91(1)). Files in criminal cases where the sentence had not been enforced were to be kept until the expiry of the limitation period for the enforcement of the sentence (regulation 91(4)). The regulations did not contain special rules on the storage of classified information.
Between November 2004 and February 2008 the storage of evidence in the courts was governed by the Rules on the administration of the district, regional, administrative and military courts and courts of appeal (Правилник за администрацията в районните, окръжните, административните, военните и апелативните съдилища), issued by the Minister or Justice. Between February 2008 and August 2009 the matter was governed by similar rules issued by the Supreme Judicial Council in consultation with the Minister of Justice, and since August 2009 by similar rules issued by the Supreme Judicial Council. The 2008 and the 2009 rules contain detailed provisions on the manner in which courts must handle classified information.
Section 2(1) of the Act originally called the 1988 State Responsibility for Damage Caused to Citizens Act, renamed on 12 July 2006 the State and Municipalities Responsibility for Damage Act (“the 1988 Act”) provides for liability of the investigating and prosecuting authorities or the courts in six situations: unlawful detention; bringing of charges or conviction and sentencing, if the proceedings have later been abandoned or the conviction has been set aside; coercive medical treatment or coercive measures imposed by a court, if its decision has later been quashed as being unlawful; and serving of a sentence over and above its prescribed duration.
On 10 March 2009 a new point 7 was added to section 2(1). It provides that the State is liable for the damage which the investigating and prosecuting authorities or the courts have caused to individuals through the unlawful use of special surveillance means. There is no reported caselaw under that provision.
In their caselaw the Supreme Court of Cassation and the Supreme Administrative Court have held that the liability provisions of the 1988 Act – including those added after the Act was originally enacted – confer on the persons concerned a substantive right to claim damages, and have no retroactive effect (реш. № 63 от 21 февруари 1997 г. по гр. д. № 2180/ 1996 г., ВС; реш. № 529 от 17 юли 2001 г. по гр. д. № 24/2001 г., ВКС; опр. № 9134 от 3 октомври 2007 г. по адм. д. № 8175/2007 г., ВАС, ІІІ о.; опр. № 1046 от 6 август 2009 г. по гр. д. № 635/2009 г., ВКС, ІІІ г. о.; опр. № 1047 от 7 август 2009 г. по гр. д. № 738/2009 г., ВКС, III г. о.; реш. № 335 от 31 май 2010 г. по гр. д. № 840/2009 г., ВКС, III г. о.; реш. № 329 от 4 юни 2010 г. по гр. д. № 883/2009 г., ВКС, IV г. о.).
Paragraph 1 of the transitional and concluding provisions of the 1988 Act provides that all matters which have not been addressed in the Act are to be resolved in line with the general provisions of civil and labour law. Section 110 of the 1951 Obligations and Contracts Act, which is also applicable to proceedings under the 1988 Act (тълк. реш. № 3 от 22 април 2005 г. по т. гр. д. № 3/2004 г., ОСГК на ВКС; реш. № 7768 от 10 юни 2010 г. по адм. д. № 14132/2009 г., ВАС, ІІІ о.), provides that the limitation period for tort claims is five years.
Article 305, read in conjunction with Article 301 § 1 of the 1968 Criminal Code, as in force at the material time, makes it an offence, punishable with a term of imprisonment ranging from one to six years, for a courtappointed expert to accept an undue advantage with a view to carrying out or refraining from carrying out his or her duties. If the recipient of the bribe, in order to secure its payment, threatens the payer with abuse of office in the event of nonpayment, the offence is punishable with three to ten years' imprisonment (Article 302 § 2 and point (a)).
Article 145a § 1 of the Code, added in 1997, makes it an offence to use information obtained through covert surveillance for purposes other than protection of national security or the investigation and prosecution of crime. Article 145a § 2 provides for a more severe punishment if the offence has been committed by an official who has acquired the information in connection with his or her duties.
Article 284c of the Code, added in 2009, makes it an offence for an official to unlawfully use, or allow or order the use of, special surveillance means, or unlawfully keep information obtained through such means.
Article 287a of the Code, added in 1997, makes it an offence to (a) make false technical recordings; (b) forge such recordings; (c) rearrange them and thus create a false impression; (d) use forged recordings; or (e) use unlawfully information acquired through special means of surveillance, provided those acts have been perpetrated with a view to deceiving a judicial authority.