The case originated in an application (no. 33938/08) against the Russian Federation lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Russian national, Mr Nikolay Stepanovich Andrushchenko (“the applicant”), on 6 May 2008. The applicant died on 19 April 2017. On 29 April 2017 Mrs Lyudmila Nikolayevna Andrushchenko, the late applicant’s wife, notified the Court of her wish to pursue the pending application in her late husband’s stead.
The applicant and Mrs Andrushchenko were represented by Mr K. Kuzminykh, a lawyer practising in St Petersburg. The Russian Government (“the Government”) were represented by Mr G. Matyushkin, Representative of the Russian Federation to the European Court of Human Rights, and then by his successor in that office, Mr M. Galperin.
On 29 September 2016 notice of the complaints under Article 3, Article 5 § 3, Article 10 and Article 13 (in conjunction with Articles 3 and 10) of the Convention was given to the Government and the remainder of the application was declared inadmissible pursuant to Rule 54 § 3 of the Rules of Court.
The applicant was born in 1943 and lived in St Petersburg.
The applicant was a member of the editorial board of New Petersburg, a local newspaper for which he wrote various articles. Some 50,000 copies of this newspaper were distributed.
Between April and July 2006 he wrote four articles concerning the trial of a group of four people accused of murdering a foreign national in a racist attack.
On 7 March 2007 the newspaper published an article by the applicant entitled “Bloody Saturday of 3 March 2007” relating to a protest demonstration which had taken place on 3 March 2007 and its forcible dispersal by the police, officers of the Special Forces (“the SF”) and the Federal Security Service (“the FSB”). It read as follows:
“... The official coup by Valentina Matviyenko and Vladislav Piotrovskiy in St Petersburg brings us to consider the current political regime as defunct and to start its gradual democratic deconstruction. Blood shed at the streets of the besieged Leningrad brings us to consider the powers of Vladimir Putin and Valentina Matviyenko as null. This is to come.
All starts some forty minutes before the March of Dissenters ... by those who dissent from the fascism of the Russian State ... Around the venue one can see lots of cops’ vehicles ... Among the cops and SF officers in black fascist uniforms one can spot numerous ‘bloodhounds/bandogs’ (‘шныри’) from the Federal Security Service ... All the area is kettled and guarded by subhumans in black who behave arrogantly like occupiers and pretend to be some kind of power showing its contempt to Leningrad ... One ‘bloodhound/bandog’ from the cops’ office or the FSB is squeaking on his walkie-talkie, ‘Track [that person]!’ ... And this is long before the start of the demonstration ... Those bastards from the armed forces tracked free citizens of our city, apparently without a court order and before those citizens engaged in any activities. And then another voice saying, ‘I don’t care about that one ... Keep a watch on Limonov. The office wants him for sure.’
And then the well-organised and peaceful group starts to march ... Another hog in plain clothes is mumbling on his walkie-talkie, ‘No blows to the faces. Hit them in the kidney area. Leave no traces ...’
Around the demonstration there are lines of wooden soldiers ... against the elderly and the kids. Against Leningrad! ... Among the FS officers one fat shorty is particularly brutal. Probably with an inferiority complex and with a twisted mouth full of rotten teeth, he is hitting people all around, he is picking girls from the crowd and dragging them to buses ... He is not going against males (maybe he is impotent) ...
The demonstration is advancing ... Cops’ cordons are squeezing people like the lice ... Now occupiers in fascist uniforms are beating [name], member of the city parliament ... The crowd of black occupiers is trying to pull one of theirs from the protesters ...”
On 21 June 2007 the newspaper published the applicant’s article “Time to buy guns: Putin’s oprichniks kill souls and the faith”. It contained critical statements about an unrelated trial, the role of the prosecution and the jury. It read as follows:
“... And various pictures run through my head. [One of the defendants], who is wearing sunny white clothes, looks lost and turns his head while a huge court bailiff is pushing him towards the courtroom’s metal cage. I shake [the defendant’s] hand, it is cold. It is not alive, the State fascists have killed his soul! I then say something in passing and hear myself saying ‘We are going to punish them soon’. And then ask myself ‘Who are ‘them’?’ And I answer that, ‘We are going to punish all those who kill justice, souls and the faith’ ... And then I remembered that [the defendant’s] face was like Gavroche’s face in the Bastille museum in Paris ... When you look at that painting, you cannot but hear La Marseillaise and the call of that Great Revolution (so distant but close at the same time): ‘To arms, citizens!’”
On 10 September 2007 the chief of the Organised Crime Unit of the St Petersburg Department of the Interior sought judicial authorisation to intercept the applicant’s telephone conversations. The City Court authorised the interception for 180 days.
Between 16 and 19 November 2007 the newspaper also published several other articles written by the applicant about allegations of corruption in respect of senior officials. Allegedly, all the copies of the relevant editions were bought by police officers.
On 22 November 2007 a criminal investigation was opened against the applicant under Articles 294 (obstruction of a criminal investigation and justice) and 298 (defamation of a judge/juror/prosecutor involving accusations of a serious or particularly serious criminal offence) of the Criminal Code. It was considered that the articles published in 2006 had interfered with the course of justice in that they could have influenced jurors sitting on the trial in question, which was pending at the time. It was also noted that in June 2007 the applicant had written another article suggesting that he knew some of the jurors, had provided them with information and had managed to obtain a recording of their deliberations. He had also allegedly made death threats to the jurors since the article was entitled “Time to buy guns ...” and contained a promise to punish those responsible for “neglecting the presumption of innocence and kill[ing] the four Russian boys’ faith in justice” (see also paragraph 8 above). In the investigator’s view, the above article disclosed offences under Articles 294 and 298 of the Criminal Code. Lastly, it contained defamatory statements about the judge presiding at that trial, the public prosecutor M. and others, accusing them of rendering or assisting in rendering a premediated unlawful judgment.
On the same date another investigator initiated criminal proceedings against the applicant under Article 129 of the Criminal Code.
On 22 and 23 November 2007 officers of the Organised Crime Unit allegedly blocked the publication of the new edition, including one of the applicant’s articles.
On 23 November 2007 the applicant was arrested.
On 24 November 2007 the Dzerzhinskiy District Court of St Petersburg upheld the applicant’s arrest and authorised his detention pending the completion of an investigation under Articles 294 and 298 of the Criminal Code, pre-trial detention being permitted in respect of offences punishable by at least two years’ imprisonment. The court provided the following reasons.
(i)  It was satisfied that there was a justifiable reasonable suspicion against the applicant and that the available material confirmed that the applicant might be implicated in the offences for which a criminal investigation had been opened.
(ii)  While the offences under Articles 294 and 298 of the Criminal Code were punishable by up to two years’ imprisonment and a longer prison term respectively, the seriousness of the actual charges disclosed that they were more dangerous.
(iii)  There was a risk that, if at large, the suspect would continue his criminal activities and, as an aggravating element, via the mass media outlets to which he had access. He might also obstruct the investigation by threatening “participants to the proceedings” and impeding the collection of evidence or by fleeing justice.
(iv)  The material placed before the court was insufficient for the allegation that the suspect’s state of health would be incompatible with detention in a remand centre as it would, in any event, have facilities for providing medical care.
On 30 November 2007 the investigator ordered that the applicant undergo an inpatient psychiatric examination, which lasted until February 2008. Allegedly no investigative measures were carried out during that period.
On 22 January 2008 the District Court extended the applicant’s detention until 21 March 2008. The court held as follows.
(a)  As the applicant had been a deputy director of the publishing house and the author of articles published in New Petersburg and as the charges concerned offences against the administration of justice, the charges disclosed a heightened danger to the public and a risk that the applicant might “continue his criminal activity”.
(b)  As the applicant had expressed threats to the lives and limbs of the jurors in his article in 2007 and as the investigator had yet to interview those people, there was a risk that the applicant might interfere with the investigation. The court noted that there was a pending case relating to the suspension of the newspaper’s circulation.
On an unspecified date the activities of the applicant’s newspaper and its editorial board were suspended. The applicant was apparently no longer employed there.
In February 2008 further charges were brought against the applicant under Article 319 of the Criminal Code.
In March 2008 the applicant was accused of committing an offence under Article 280 of the Criminal Code (public appeals to engage in extremist activity) in relation to his article “Bloody Saturday of 3 March 2007” (see paragraph 7 above).
His subsequent detention was extended in relation to the charges pending under Articles 294, 298 and 280 of the Criminal Code.
In April 2008 additional charges were added under Article 319 of the Criminal Code in relation to some of the published articles and under Article 294. The charges under Article 298 were reclassified under Article 319 (as regards the insult against prosecutor M.).
In May 2008 the case against the applicant in respect of the charges under Articles 129, 280 and 319 of the Criminal Code was submitted to the District Court for trial.
On 20 May 2008 the District Court dismissed the prosecutor’s request to extend the applicant’s detention and ordered his release. He was ordered not to leave his area of residence. The court referred to the following factors.
(i)  Following the reclassification of the specific charges, the relevant statutory offences were regarded as “minor” or “moderately serious” according to the domestic legal classification.
(ii)  Since the activity of the newspaper and its editorial board had been suspended and the defendant was no longer employed there, there was no longer a risk of him continuing any criminal activities.
(iii)  The investigation had been completed and the prosecution’s evidence had been collected and submitted to the court. There was therefore no longer a risk of the applicant obstructing justice by threatening participants in the case or destroying or obstructing the collection of evidence.
(iv)  The applicant’s advanced age and state of health, namely the presence of serious chronic diseases that posed a direct threat to his life and the need for him to undergo regular skilled medical care, which was “not doubted by the court”.
The defence adduced in evidence a specialist report compiled by Mr D., who had degrees in ethnology and history. Mr D. assessed the applicant’s articles, including his article “Bloody Saturday of 3 March 2007”. Mr D.’s report read in the relevant parts as follows:
“The impugned articles are journalistic works using expressive and emotive wording that are specific to this genre. Their topics concern a conflict around the Dissenters’ March: the articles provide a detailed view of it through the eyes of an eyewitness ...
The journalistic genre of the impugned articles allows for relatively harsh, or at times radical, assessments. The main topics of the articles touch upon the political situation in the country – they are full of harsh value judgments and metaphors that disclose the author’s negative attitude towards certain events.
As to the article ‘Bloody Saturday of 3 March 2007’, the author expresses, in a critical manner, his attitude toward the Russian State’s law enforcement agencies in the context of a protest rally on 3 March 2007. There was a conflict between those who had organised the rally and law enforcement officers. Thus the author uses a harsh and radical metaphor of ‘occupation’ while presenting law enforcement officers as ‘occupiers’ who, in the author’s view, struggled against the people they were serving ...”
On 22 June 2009 the District Court convicted the applicant under Article 282 of the Criminal Code as regards the article entitled “Bloody Saturday of 3 March 2007”. The trial court reclassified the charges under Article 280 to Article 282 of the Criminal Code (which was arguably less stringent), which concerned acts aimed at inciting hatred or enmity or at the abasement of the dignity of members of a “social group”, namely law enforcement officers, through the use of the mass media. It convicted the applicant, stating:
“The expert report indicates that the writer of the article takes a particularly aggressive and critical stance towards the Russian State’s law enforcement authorities in relation to the [opposition march] held on 3 March 2007. The writer used phrases like ‘Russian State fascism’ or ‘police regime’ to describe the Russian political system ... which implies that elements of fascism or a police regime, including violence and arbitrariness, are inherent in the political system in Russia.
The writer used words relating to the theme of fascism in relation to the law enforcement authorities or Federal Security Service (FSB), for instance:
‘There were numerous FSB “bloodhounds/bandogs” among the cops and Special Squad men in black fascist uniforms [also called ‘subhumans in black’ by the writer] ...
... Cops behave arrogantly, like occupiers, pretending to be some kind of power showing its manifest contempt to Leningrad ...
... a driver in black sits in his car and grins. Here he is the INVADER of Leningrad!
INVADERS IN FASCIST UNIFORMS ... as one FASCIST ... A bunch of BLACK OCCUPIERS ... OCCUPIERS IN BLACK ...’
...
The Court has no doubts, and this is confirmed by the expert report and not refuted by the specialist report, that the article contains an extremely negative emotional assessment of the social group that includes law enforcement officers. The article creates a negative attitude toward that social group, namely the feeling of hatred, causing enmity on the part of other citizens.
Enmity and the disparagement of dignity are directed against law enforcement officers, who are a group of people interacting with each other in a specific manner and who perceive their own membership of that group and are perceived as such by others. Furthermore, the group fulfils a function which is necessary for society. Taken as a whole, the above elements indicate that law enforcement officers are a ‘social group’ within the meaning of the anti-extremist legislation.
Incitement to hatred and enmity arose on account of attributing – to all members of that social group – extremely negative traits, coupled with insulting statements. Clearly, this forms a negative social stereotype and an impression that members of that group are hostile. As to the debasement of dignity, firstly, it was expressed through the comparison between law enforcement officers and fascist occupiers, who are absolutely immoral people. Taken together with other, extremely unfavourable, assessments of individual traits of certain protagonists of the article: ... ‘hog in plain clothes’, ‘FSB bloodhounds/bandogs’, the statements made by the defendant should be characterised as indecent and debasing the honour and dignity of members of the social group ...
The court notes that at present there is no specific licensed procedure for producing expert reports for assessing whether material distributed by mass media outlets encourages enmity. Thus the court takes into account the expert reports produced by professionals in the areas of psychology and linguistics as well as Mr D.’s specialist opinion ...”
The trial court sentenced the applicant to a one-year suspended sentence of imprisonment in relation to the charge under Article 282 of the Criminal Code. The prison term was deemed served because of the expiry of the relevant statutory time-limit for enforcing the sentence.
At the same time, the trial court acquitted the applicant in relation to certain other articles and related offences under Articles 129, 280 and 319 of the Criminal Code.
The applicant appealed to the City Court, arguing that his negative assessment of the political regime and work of the public authorities fell outside the scope of Article 282 of the Criminal Code since it was unjustified to apply the classification of a “social group” in the circumstances of the case.
On 20 October 2009 the City Court upheld the trial judgment, in particular as regards Article 282 of the Criminal Code.
From the night of 23 to 24 November until 26 November 2007 the applicant was held in a temporary detention centre. The temperature in his cell was around 0oC, and the walls were covered with ice. He was given no mattress, blanket or warm clothes. According to the applicant, at the time the central heating system had broken down and was undergoing repair works. It appears that his next of kin and friends tried to provide him with clothing but the investigator in charge of the case (or another public official) stopped him from receiving them. It appears that except for a detention hearing on 24 November 2007 (see paragraph 15 above) the applicant was kept in the cell for most of the time.
On 26 November 2007 the applicant was transferred to remand centre no. 47/4 and placed in cell no. 80 which had fifteen beds for twentyseven detainees. From 29 November to 4 December 2007 he was kept in a dark “punishment cell” in a humid basement with water on the floor and moisture on the walls. In the main body of the remand centre the bedding was bug-infested and was only washed once in five months. The drinking water came from the general drainage system, without any filtering. It had a heavy metallic taste and contained chemicals that were dangerous for one’s health.
It appears that at the time the applicant was suffering from high blood pressure, and had medical conditions relating to his eyes and his heart function.
From 24 to 26 November 2007 the applicant was held in a temporary detention centre. The centre was fully equipped, including a central heating system, in compliance with the applicable legislation. It had 37 cells for 107 detainees. From 24 to 26 November 2007 it accommodated between thirteen and twenty-three people.
From 26 November 2007 to 20 May 2008 the applicant was held in detention centre no. 47/4. From 26 to 28 November 2007 he was kept in cell no. 80 accommodating four people. From 28 November to 3 December 2007 he was kept in cell no. 0/4 alone. Thereafter, he was kept in different cells accommodating between two and four people. The applicant was provided with an individual sleeping place and bedding.
Prior to August 2006 section 1 of the Suppression of Extremism Act (Federal Law no. 114-FZ on Combatting Extremist Activity, 25 July 2002) defined extremist activity/extremism as:
(i)  forcible change of the constitutional foundations of the Russian Federation and breach of its territorial integrity;
(ii)  undermining the national security of the Russian Federation;
(iii)  usurpation of power;
(iv)  founding armed criminal groups;
(v)  carrying out terrorist activity;
(vi)  inciting racial, national/ethnic, religious hatred or social hatred accompanied by violence or calls for violence;
(vii)  diminishing national pride;
(viii)  creating mass disorder and committing acts of large-scale hooliganism or large-scale vandalism out of ideological, political, racial, national/ethnic or religious hatred or enmity, or out of hatred or enmity towards a social group;
(ix)  propaganda promoting the exceptionality, superiority or inferiority of people on the grounds of their religion, social position, race, nationality/ethnic origin or language;
(x)  propaganda and public display of Nazi attributes or symbols or attributes or symbols similar to Nazi attributes or symbols to the point of becoming undistinguishable;
(xi)  public appeals to carry out the aforementioned acts;
(xii)  funding the aforementioned acts or giving any assistance in preparing and carrying them out, including by providing training, printing and material/technical support, telephone or other means of communications or information services.
In August 2006 the above list was amended to include:
(i)  public justification of terrorism;
(ii)  obstruction of the lawful activities of State authorities, electoral commissions and their officials, combined with violence or threats of the use thereof;
(iii)  public defamation of a State official of the Russian Federation or its constituent entities during the exercise of his or her official duties or in connection with those duties, including accusations of committing the acts mentioned in section 1 of the Act (provided that defamation was proven before a court);
(iv)  use of violence or threats of violence against a State official or his or her next of kin in relation to his or her official duties;
(v)  an assassination attempt in respect of a State official or public figure, committed with the aim of putting an end to his or her public or other political activity or as a measure of revenge for that activity;
(vi)  violation of an individual’s rights and freedoms or damage to health or property on account of his or her religion, race, ethnicity, social position or social origin.
In August 2007 the list was amended further and new definitions of extremist activity were added.
Article 280 punishes public appeals to engage in extremist activity (Article 280 § 1) and the same offence committed via the mass media (Article 280 § 2). The latter offence was punishable at the time by either compulsory labour or up to five years’ imprisonment.
Article 282 § 1 of the Criminal Code prohibits acts aimed at inciting hatred or enmity and the abasement of the dignity of a person or a group of persons on the basis of sex, race, nationality, language, origin, attitude to religion or affiliation to a social group. Acts committed in public or by the use of the mass media are punishable by up to two years’ imprisonment. On 22 April 2010 the Constitutional Court of Russia declared inadmissible a complaint of the vagueness and insufficient foreseeability of the term “social group” (decision no. 564-O-O of 22 April 2010). The relevant part of the decision reads:
“... Article 282 of the Criminal Code of Russia punishes acts aimed at inciting hatred or enmity and the abasement of human dignity. This provision ... guarantees recognition and respect for human dignity regardless of any physical or social attributes, and establishes criminal liability only for acts committed with direct intent and aimed at inciting hatred or enmity and the abasement of the dignity of a person or a group of people. This legal provision does not therefore lack foreseeability and may not be considered to be a breach of the applicant’s constitutional rights.”
On 28 June 2011 the Plenary Supreme Court issued ruling no. 11 concerning criminal cases relating to extremism. The following instructions were given to the lower courts.
(i)  Protection for the public interest (such as constitutional foundations, territorial integrity and national security) should be secured and constitutional rights and freedoms (such as religious freedoms, freedom of expression, the freedom of the mass media to seek, receive and impart information by lawful means, and freedom of assembly) should be safeguarded.
(ii)  “Extremist cases” should be distinguished from other cases on account of the special motive that must be proven (namely political, ideological, racial, ethnic or religious hatred or enmity, or motives of hatred or enmity in relation to a social group).
(iii)  Public appeals to engage in extremist activities (in terms of Article 280 of the Criminal Code) are defined as public appeals to others (by any means, including via the Internet) with the aim of inciting them to engage in extremist activities. At the same time, public dissemination of information arguing for or justifying unlawful acts on the grounds of race, ethnicity, religious beliefs and the like should instead be classified under Article 282 of the Criminal Code.
(iv)  “Acts aimed at inciting hatred or enmity” should include, for example, expressions justifying or arguing for genocide, mass repressions, deportations or other unlawful acts in respect of people of a certain nation, race, followers of a certain religion or other groups of people. Criticism in respect of political organisations, ideological and religious organisations or criticism in respect of political, ideological or religious beliefs, ethnic or religious customs should not, per se, be classified as acts aimed at inciting hatred or enmity.
Until 2011 Article 129 of the Criminal Code provided that defamation – the dissemination of manifestly false information damaging one’s honour and dignity or reputation – involving an accusation of a serious or particularly serious offence was punishable by a fine or up to three years’ “restriction of liberty” or imprisonment.
Article 294 provides that interference with the functioning of the courts with the aim of obstructing justice is punishable by a fine, compulsory labour or up to two years’ imprisonment.
Until 2011 Article 298 provided that defamation of judges, jurors, prosecutors or investigators was punishable by up to four years’ imprisonment.
Article 319 provided that public insult of a public official in the exercise of his or her public duties or in connection with those duties was punishable by a fine, community service or compulsory labour.
The European Commission for Democracy through Law (the Venice Commission) adopted Opinion no. 660/2011 (CDL-AD (2012)016) “On the Federal Law on Combatting Extremist Activity of the Russian Federation”.
On 9 March 2009 the OSCE Office for Democratic Institutions and Human Rights published “Hate Crime Laws: A Practical Guide”, in which it made the following observations on the possible scope of victim attributes in hate crime law:
“If a law includes characteristics that are not immutable or in some manner essential to a person’s sense of self and shared by persons who as a group have experienced discrimination, exclusion or oppression, it can be discredited as a hate crime law. Further, it can fail to protect those groups which are in fact victimized. People protected under the term “social group” might include members of the police or politicians, neither of whom is typically perceived as an oppressed group or as sharing fundamental bonds of identity. Indeed, if a law includes protected characteristics that are too far away from the core concept of hate crime it may no longer be seen as a hate crime law.
Further, the legal concept of certainty requires that a person be able to reasonably foresee the criminal consequences of his or her actions. The concept of legal certainty is reflected in both domestic laws in the OSCE region and regional and international human rights instruments. A law that imposes increased penalties but is unclear about the circumstances in which those penalties will be applied is likely to fail this fundamental test.”