The case originated in an application (no. 34846/08) against the Republic of Bulgaria lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by two Bulgarian nationals, Mr Stoyan Mitkov Dimitrov and Mr Ivan Nikolaev Ribov (“the applicants”), on 15 July 2008.
The applicants were represented by Mr M. Ekimdzhiev and Ms K. Boncheva, lawyers practising in Plovdiv. The Bulgarian Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Ms Raya Nikolova, of the Ministry of Justice.
The applicants alleged, in particular, that they had been serving their whole life sentences in inhuman and degrading conditions.
On 8 November 2011 the complaints, under Article 3 of the Convention, concerning the regime and material conditions of their detention, as well as the lack of adequate medical treatment provided to them in Burgas Prison and, under Article 13 in conjunction with Article 3 of the Convention, concerning the unavailability of an effective domestic remedy related to the above complaints, were communicated to the Government and the remainder of the application was declared inadmissible.
The applicants were born in 1974 and 1979 respectively and are serving whole life sentences in Burgas Prison.
.  The facts of the case can be summarised as follows.
In November 2001 both applicants were arrested on suspicion of murder and were remanded in custody. In September 2002 they were transferred to Burgas Prison. In December 2004 the trial court, Burgas Regional Court, found them guilty of murder resulting from terrorist activity and sentenced them to whole life imprisonment, to be served initially under the “special regime”. In April 2006 the appellate court, Burgas Court of Appeal, upheld that sentence which was further upheld by the Supreme Court of Cassation in a final judgment of 16 January 2008.
The applicants have been serving their sentences under the “special regime” in Burgas Prison, in permanently locked individual cells measuring 1.5 by 3 metres, under heightened security supervision. Both applicants have been allowed out of their cells for between one and two hours a day to take exercise in the open, which they have been spending walking in the prison courtyard.
The parties diverge in respect of the material conditions in which the applicants have been kept.
According to the applicants, the daylight in the cells has been scant and a light bulb attached to the ceiling has been on 24 hours a day. There is so little unencumbered space in the cell that the applicants are forced to spend most of the day either lying or sitting on their beds. There are no toilets in their cells and, since the beginning of 2008, the prison authorities have allowed them to use the common sanitary facilities three times a day. The rest of the time they use a bucket to satisfy their physiological needs. Hygiene is rather poor: the prison premises, including the canteen and kitchen, are infested with cockroaches and rats. The food is of inadequate quality and insufficient quantity. The medical service in the prison lacks even the most basic medical supplies. Mr Dimitrov caught psoriasis in prison and because of the absence of adequate treatment his condition has deteriorated into psoriatic arthritis.
According to the Government, the applicants’ cells are equipped with toilets and the light is sufficient for them to read and write. In addition, the prison premises are cleaned every day and a thorough cleaning is carried out weekly by a specially designated individual. The authorities employ the services of an external company which regularly cleans and disinfects all prison areas. The prison director supervises the quality and quantity of the food offered to the inmates who receive meat dishes six times a week and a vegetarian dish once a week. The prisoners have access to a bathroom with hot running water six times a day. Sometimes they spend up to two hours a day in the open. They can visit the prison library, the prison chapel, as well as take part in – unspecified – group activities. Mr Ribov has tended to participate in them happily, while Mr Dimitrov has refused to do so without giving any reason for that.
The law related to the regime of prisoners sentenced to life imprisonment, to claims for damages under the State and Municipalities Liability for Damage Act 1988 (“the SMRDA”), as well as the findings of the Committee for the Prevention of Torture (the CPT) have been set out in detail in Harakchiev and Tolumov v. Bulgaria (nos. 15018/11 and 61199/12, §§ 114-146, and §§ 165-174, ECHR 2014 (extracts)).
Ordinance No. 2 of 19 April 1999, issued by the Minister of Justice and European Integration in 1999 and quashed in 2006, provided in section 14 that individuals sentenced to life imprisonment in judgments which were not final had to be kept in permanently locked cells and did not have the right to take part in common activities.
The CPT, in its report on its 2012 visit to Burgas Prison, noted the following in relation to life prisoners there. The cells used to accommodate those serving life sentences in the high-security units were small. Exceptions were two larger cells (approximately 9 m² each) with a fully partitioned sanitary annex, which was in principle a far more satisfactory arrangement. The cells accommodating life-sentenced prisoners were in the same advanced state of dilapidation and insalubrity as the rest of the prisoner accommodation. The situation was compounded by damage in some cells resulting from leaking sewage pipes. On a positive note, cell windows at Burgas Prison had been replaced a few years earlier and access to natural light was adequate. That said, artificial lighting was kept on all night, obliging inmates to improvise lampshades to dim the light. Lifesentenced prisoners could shower twice a week and were released six times a day to go to the toilets. They had to use buckets the rest of the time. As for the common sanitary facilities, they were in an extremely poor state of repair and filthy.
As regards other activities, the CPT observed that life prisoners could have TV and radio in their cells, as well as books. The delegation was informed that regular anger management, behavioural and emotional group work organised by a social worker, which had been discontinued 18 months earlier, was about to resume. Some individual written plans had been developed for those serving life sentences. That said, there appeared to be little or no structurally planned intervention on the part of staff to attempt to provide appropriate mental and physical stimulation to these prisoners.
In its report on its 2014 visit to Burgas Prison, the CPT observed that the situation was, in many respects, of even more concern than in 2012. The Committee concluded that the situation demonstrated a persistent lack of action by the authorities to improve conditions in the prison system. Only a very small proportion of prisoners serving life sentences were allowed to associate with other prisoners. The material conditions of the high-security units were particularly poor and inadequate, as was the regime of activities. Prisoners serving life sentences could have TV and/or radio sets in their cells, as well as books, newspapers and (sometimes) DVD players and playstations. In several respects the conditions of detention at Burgas and two other prisons were so unacceptable that they could be considered as inhuman and degrading.
Apart from in Burgas Prison, all cells for prisoners serving life sentences were equipped with (partially screened) sanitary annexes, comprising a toilet and a washbasin. By contrast, those serving life sentences at Burgas still had to resort to buckets most of the time, since they were only allowed to visit the communal toilets six times a day (and not at all during the night). Most were no longer handcuffed while moving within their units. However, they were usually handcuffed during medical examinations. The situation concerning healthcare was as dramatic as the one found during the 2012 visit: the healthcare team consisted only of a dentist, a feldsher and a nurse, while the two posts of general practitioner and psychiatrist had remained vacant.
The CPT reiterated that the regime for life-sentenced prisoners in Bulgaria should be fundamentally reviewed so as to include a structured programme of constructive and preferably out-of-cell activities; educators and psychologists should be proactive in working with life-sentenced prisoners to encourage them to take part in that programme and attempt to have them engage safely with other prisoners for at least a part of each day.
On 26 March 2015 the CPT made a public statement in respect of Bulgaria in accordance with Article 10, paragraph 2, of the European Convention on the Prevention of Torture and Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment. In the public statement, the CPT referred to its finding during an ad hoc visit it had made to Bulgaria in early 2015. In particular it noted that the vast majority of inmates still had no access to organised out-of-cell activities and were left in a state of idleness for up to 23 hours per day. In terms of material conditions, the CPT observed that, in Burgas Prison and the two other establishments visited in 2015, the conditions remained characterised by an ever-worsening state of dilapidation. Most of the sanitary facilities were totally decrepit and unhygienic, and the heating systems functioned for only a few hours a day. The kitchen remained filthy and unhygienic and infested with vermin, with leaking and overflowing sewage pipes, and walls and ceilings covered in mould. Most parts of the prison were unfit for human accommodation and represented a serious health risk to both inmates and staff. In the CPT’s view, the material conditions alone could be seen as amounting to inhuman and degrading treatment. This state of affairs highlighted a persistent failure by the Bulgarian authorities to address most of the fundamental shortcomings in the treatment and conditions of detention of persons deprived of their liberty, despite the specific recommendations repeatedly made by the CPT. The CPT was of the view that action in this respect was long overdue and that the approach to the whole issue of deprivation of liberty in Bulgaria had to radically change.