PROCEDURE
“The private entrepreneur Mr V., during the period between 1 January 1994 and 1 January 1996, intentionally did not pay taxes to the State budget in the amount of UAH 12,889, having caused damage and substantial losses to the State.
On 28 May 1996 the preventive measure – obligation not to abscond – was ordered in respect of Mr V., but, having been summoned by the investigator, Mr V. did not come to him, and his whereabouts at the present are unknown. On 4 September 1996 the preventive measure – detention – was ordered in respect of Mr V.
... Mr V. may inform his mother and brother about his whereabouts, using the postal and telegraphic correspondence.”
No time-limit for the interception had been fixed in the order.
Proceedings for compensation
The relevant extracts of the Constitution of Ukraine (first published in the Gazette of the Verkhovna Rada of  of 23 July 1996, No. 30, article 141) read as follows:
Article 31
“Everyone shall be guaranteed privacy of mail, telephone conversations, telegraph and other correspondence. Exceptions shall be established only by a court in cases envisaged by law, with the purpose of preventing crime or ascertaining the truth in the course of the investigation of a criminal case, if it is not possible to obtain information by other means.”
Article 55
“Human and citizens’ rights and freedoms shall be protected by the courts.
Everyone shall be guaranteed a right to challenge in court the decisions, actions or omissions of bodies of State power, bodies of local self-government, officials and officers. ...
Everyone shall have a right to protect his or her rights and freedoms from violations and illegal encroachments by any means not prohibited by law.”
Article 56
 “Everyone shall have a right to compensation from public or municipal bodies for losses sustained as a result of unlawful decisions, acts or omissions by public or municipal bodies or civil servants in the performance of their official duties.”
Chapter XV
Transitional Provisions
At the material time Article 187 of the Code in the wording of 16 April 1984 (the relevant Amendment Law first published in the Gazette of the Verkhovna Rada of the Ukrainian SSR, 1984, No. 18, article 351) read as follows:
The interception of correspondence and its seizure in postal and telegraphic establishments
“The interception of correspondence and its seizure in postal and telegraphic establishments shall be conducted with the approval of the prosecutor or his deputy, or upon the resolution of a court.
The investigator shall issue an order for interception and seizure of postal and telegraphic correspondence. In that order, the investigator shall propose that a postal and telegraphic establishment intercept the correspondence defined in the order and inform him about it. The examination of correspondence shall be conducted in the presence of two representatives of the post office, and minutes are drawn up to this end.
The interception of correspondence shall be cancelled by an order of the investigator, when the application of this measure is no longer required.”
(This Article was substantially re-worded in June 2001)
The relevant provisions of the Law (first published in the official newspaper “Golos Ukrainy”, 27 March 1992, No. 56) provided as relevant:
Article 6
Grounds for conduct of the search and seizure activities
“The grounds for conduct of the search and seizure activities are:
1) presence of sufficient information, about ...
- persons who are preparing or have committed a crime;
- persons who are hiding from the investigative bodies, court or are evading the application of criminal sanctions; ...
It is prohibited to make decisions on the conduct of search and seizure activities for other purposes than the ones established by this Article.”
Article 8
The rights of the departments that conduct search and seizure activities
“Operational units when executing their tasks in connection with operational searches (...) have the following rights:
10) to survey selectively, in accordance with particular characteristics, telegraphic and postal correspondence.”
Article 9
Guarantees of lawfulness during the conduct of search and seizure activities
“...During the search and seizure activities violation of rights and freedoms of individuals and legal persons shall not be allowed. Any limitation of these rights and freedoms shall be of an exceptional and temporary nature ... in the situations stipulated by the legislation of  with the aim of protecting the rights and freedoms of other persons, the safety of the society...
During the search and seizure activities, officers of the operational units shall be obliged to take into account their proportionality to the level of social danger of criminal attempts and the danger to the interests of the society and the State.
In case of violation of rights and freedoms of individuals and legal persons ...the Ministry of Internal Affairs... shall restore the violated rights and compensate for the material and moral damage which had occurred.”
The relevant provisions of the Law (first published in the Gazette of the Verkhovna Rada of  of 3 January 1995, No. 1, article 1) read as follows:
Article 1
“Under the provisions of this Law a citizen is entitled to compensation for damages caused by:
...3) unlawful conduct of search and seizure activities ...
Article 2
“The right to compensation for damages in the amount of and in accordance with the procedure established by this Law shall arise in cases of:
acquittal by a court;
the termination of a criminal case on grounds of the absence of proof of the commission of a crime, the absence of corpus delicti, or a lack of evidence of the accused’s participation in the commission of the crime;
the refusal to initiate criminal proceedings or the termination of criminal proceedings on the grounds stipulated in sub-paragraph 2 of paragraph 1 of this Article;
the termination of proceedings for an administrative offence.”
Article 3
“In the cases referred to in Article 1 of this Law the applicant shall be compensated for...
5) moral damage.”
Article 4
“...Compensation for moral damage shall be given in cases in which unlawful actions of bodies of inquiry, pre-trial investigation, prosecutors and courts caused moral losses to a citizen, led to disruption of his usual life relations and required additional efforts for organisation of his or her life.
The moral damage shall be considered suffering caused to a citizen due to physical or psychological influence which led to deterioration or deprivation of possibilities to follow his or her usual habits and wishes, deterioration of relations with people around, other negative impacts of moral nature.”