The case originated in an application (no. 72754/11) against the Republic of Turkey lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by an Uzbek national, Mr Uktam Musaev (“the applicant”), on 28 October 2011.
The applicant, who had been granted legal aid, was represented by Ms S. N. Yılmaz and Mr A. Yılmaz, lawyers practising in Istanbul. The Turkish Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent.
On 4 June 2012 the application was communicated to the Government.
The applicant was born in 1981 and, according to the latest information available to the Court, lives in Aksaray.
On 2 April 2011 the applicant, who had been living in Turkey since 2008, was taken into custody in the context of an investigation into murder by a person or persons unknown. He was placed in the Yedikule Security Directorate in Istanbul.
On 4 April 2011 the applicant delivered his witness statement before a criminal court in relation to the aforementioned investigation. However, he was not released after delivering the statement; instead he continued to be detained in the Yedikule Security Directorate for having outstayed his visa.
On 5 April 2011 the applicant was transferred to Şehit Tevfik Fikret Erciyes police station in Fatih, Istanbul (“Fatih police station”), where he was placed in a custodial cell for the next five days.
On 10 April 2011 the applicant was sent to Kumkapı Removal Centre with a view to being deported. According to the applicant’s account, Kumkapı Removal Centre was severely overcrowded at the time of his detention. He had to share a dormitory measuring approximately 3035 sq. m with twenty-four to forty-five other people and the overcrowding of the centre resulted in hygiene problems. The building was infested with insects and the quality and quantity of the food provided was also fairly poor. Moreover, there was no provision for outdoor exercise.
On 12 April 2011 the applicant lodged an application with the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) for refugee status.
On 27 April 2011 he claimed asylum from the Ministry of the Interior.
On 29 April 2011 the applicant was granted a temporary residence permit in the province of Aksaray as an asylum seeker and he was released from Kumkapı Removal Centre on the same day. It appears that the applicant was subsequently permitted to reside in Konya.
According to the latest information provided to the Court, the applicant’s applications for asylum and refugee status are still pending before the domestic authorities and the UNHCR respectively.
The relevant provisions of the Turkish Constitution provide as follows:
Article 36
“Everyone has the right to a fair trial ..., as a claimant or defendant, before courts of law ...”
Article 125
“All actions or decision taken by the authorities are amenable to judicial review...
If the implementation of an administrative measure would result in damage which is difficult or impossible to compensate and the measure is also clearly unlawful, a stay of execution may be granted, stating reasons...”
The administration shall be liable to make compensation for damage resulting from its actions or decisions.”
At the material time, Section 27(1) of the Administrative Procedure Act (Law no. 2577) provided that the implementation of an administrative decision or act would not automatically be suspended following an application to the administrative courts. Under Section 27(2), the administrative courts could order a stay of execution if the decision or act in question was manifestly unlawful and if its implementation would cause irreversible harm.
The relevant parts of Section 28 of the same Law provided as follows at the relevant time:
“(1)  The authorities shall be obliged to adopt decisions without delay or to take action in accordance with the decisions on the merits or any request for a stay of execution issued by the Supreme Administrative Court, the ordinary or regional administrative courts, or the courts dealing with tax disputes. Under no circumstances may the time taken to act exceed thirty days following service of the decision on the authorities.
...
(3)  Where the authorities do not adopt a decision or do not act in accordance with a decision by the Supreme Administrative Court, the ordinary or regional administrative courts, or the tax courts, a claim for compensation in respect of pecuniary or nonpecuniary damage may be lodged against the authorities with the Supreme Administrative Court and the other relevant courts.
(4)  In the event of the deliberate failure on the part of a civil servant to enforce a judicial decision within the thirty days [following the decision], compensation proceedings may be instigated against both the authorities and the civil servant who has refused to enforce the decision in question.”
Article 41 of the Code of Obligations (Law no. 818) in force at the material time provided as follows:
“Any person who causes damage to another in an unjust manner, be it wilfully, negligently or imprudently, shall afford redress for that damage.”
Article 141 of the Code of Criminal Procedure (Law no. 5271) sets out the circumstances in which a person detained during criminal investigation or prosecution may claim compensation from the State.
A description of the relevant domestic law and practice that governed foreigners and asylum seekers at the material time can be found in the case of Abdolkhani and Karimnia v. Turkey (no. 30471/08, §§ 2945, 22 September 2009).
The relevant international material has been summarised in the case of Yarashonen v. Turkey (no. 72710/11, §§ 27-32, 24 June 2014).