The case originated in an application (no. 14057/17) against Ukraine lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Ukrainian national, Mr Viktor Valeryevich Sukachov (“the applicant”), on 10 February 2017.
The applicant, who had been granted legal aid, was represented by Ms Y. Ashchenko, a lawyer practising in Kharkiv. On 23 August 2018 Ms Ashchenko informed the Court that she could no longer represent the applicant. The Ukrainian Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Mr I. Lishchyna.
The applicant alleged, in particular, that the conditions of his pre-trial detention and of his transfer to and detention at the court on hearing days had been inhuman and degrading, in breach of Article 3 of the Convention. He also complained, in substance under Article 13 of the Convention, that he had had no effective remedies for the above complaints.
On 19 December 2017 the Court decided to grant priority to the application under Rule 41 of the Rules of Court, give the Government notice of the applicant’s complaints, and invite the parties to comment on the suitability of the case for the pilotjudgment procedure (Rule 61 § 2 (a)).
The parties provided observations on the case. The Government also submitted comments on the application of the pilotjudgment procedure in the present case, while the applicant left this matter to the Court’s discretion.
The applicant was born in 1978 and is currently detained in Dnipro.
On 31 May 2012 the applicant was arrested on suspicion of involvement in terrorism and production and storage of explosives.
Eventually, on 20 February 2018, the Industrialnyy District Court of Dnipro (“the District Court”) found him guilty as charged and sentenced him to twelve years’ imprisonment.
Since 12 July 2012 the applicant has been held in detention in the Dnipropetrovsk (now Dnipro) Pre-trial Detention Facility no. 3, which in March 2016 was recategorised as a prison (hereinafter referred to, for practical purposes, as “the Dnipro SIZO”).
From 12 July 2012 to 19 July 2013 the applicant was held in cell no. 661 and from 21 November 2013 to 8 May 2014 in cell no. 655. According to him, both cells were located in unit 6. The parties did not specify in which of those cells the applicant had been held from 19 July to 21 November 2013, the applicant having referred to both cells. Each cell had an overall surface area of 7.7 square metres of which 6.7 square metres was the living space meant for two people. The applicant submitted that the personal living space available to him in the cells had been 3.35 square metres, which suggests that another detainee was held with him in each cell. Without disputing that submission, the Government stated that they were unable to provide information about the number of detainees held in those cells because the relevant records had been destroyed on expiry of the statutory storage period.
From 8 to 26 May 2014 the applicant was held in cell no. 931, which had an overall surface area of 14.5 square metres or 13 square metres of living space and was designed for five people. The applicant submitted that four to five detainees had been held in that cell. Without disputing the above submission, the Government referred again to the unavailability of the relevant records.
From 26 May 2014 to 22 March 2017 the applicant was held in cell no. 911, which had an overall surface area of 14.5 square metres or 13 square metres of living space and was designed for five people. The table below provides information submitted by the Government, which has not been disputed by the applicant, about the number of detainees held in the cell in various periods from 1 January 2015 to 22 March 2017. The parties did not provide exact information about the number of detainees held in that cell between 26 May 2014 and 1 January 2015, the applicant having referred to “four to five detainees”, which the Government did not dispute. Based on the principles established in Muršić v. Croatia ([GC], no. 7334/13, § 114, 20 October 2016), the last column in the table indicates the personal space available to the applicant in the cell between 1 January 2015 and 22 March 2017 (the parties did not provide information for the period beyond the latter date):
According to the applicant’s initial submissions, the abovementioned cells were poorly ventilated. In the winter the windows were locked shut so that they could not be opened and no fresh air could enter the cells. From May to October the window frames were removed and the air inside the cells became cleaner. However, due to the partial absence of glass panes in the windows, mosquitos attracted by the artificial light from the cells, which was never switched off, flew into the cells. The toilet facilities in the cells were separated from the living area by a low partition wall. They were not equipped with a siphon drainage system, as a result of which an unpleasant odour always remained in the cells. Detainees had the opportunity to take a shower only once a week. The shower cabins had an insufficient number of taps, of which only a few were usually working. It was often impossible to set an acceptable water temperature. Centralised laundry was not organised by the administration, and detainees had to wash and dry their laundry in their cells. Cells were constantly damp.
In support of his statements the applicant submitted five photographs of cell no. 911 taken by him and other detainees. The photographs show a toilet facility with a low partition wall and no door, a wash stand, a table, a bench, five beds, and laundry hanging on ropes. The applicant also referred to other detainees’ written statements. In particular, A.B., R.Sh. and A.Y., who had apparently shared cell no. 911 with him during an unspecified period, stated that the available space in the cell was limited to the 0.9-metre wide passage between the beds, which was insufficient for any physical activity. They also stated that the toilet was separated from the living area only by a 0.53 metre high wall. Detainees had had to conceal the toilet with a “curtain” made from bed sheets. The toilet hole had been blocked with a plug (grusha) made by the detainees, as there was a smell from the sewage pipe. The detainees also mentioned the inadequate ventilation in the cell and said that mosquitos entered the cell in huge quantities (given that in the summer the window frame was removed).
The applicant further referred to the written statements of the abovementioned detainees and two other detainees (S.K and K.Z.) about the general situation in the Dnipro SIZO. All of them stated that detainees could take a shower only once a week and that the showers were dirty and some of the taps were out of order. They also confirmed the situation with the laundry as described by the applicant. S.K. and K.Z. also referred to overcrowding, poor lighting and ventilation in their own cells, their unsanitary condition, lack of separation of the toilet from the living area, no provision of personal hygiene material, necessities or cleansers, daily walks lasting less than one hour in a small, dirty and dusty exercise yard, poor food, and so on.
Lastly, in support of his submissions about the conditions of detention in the Dnipro SIZO, the applicant referred to the reports prepared by the European Committee for the Prevention of Torture and Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment (“the CPT”) following its 2009 and 2013 visits to Ukraine (see paragraphs 28 and 30 below) and to the report for 2012 prepared by the National Preventive Mechanism (“the NPM”; see paragraph 46 below), both of which had visited the SIZO.
According to the Government, which referred to a letter from the Administration of the State Service for the Execution of Sentences (“the SSES”) of 16 March 2018 prepared at their request, all cells mentioned by the applicant were in a satisfactory state. They were equipped with sitting and sleeping places as well as the necessary furniture and other items. Detainees had the possibility to work with documents, eat and rest in the cells. All cells had sanitary facilities, including wash stands and toilets with a working flush system, which were isolated from the living area by a 1.6 metre high wall. Lights were on day and night in the cells and the ventilation was adequate. From 10 p.m. until 6 a.m. detainees were allowed to sleep uninterrupted; daily walks outside the cells lasted for one hour; the exercise yard for cells nos. 661 and 655 measured 11.5 square metres, and for cells nos. 911 and 931 – 15 and 30 square metres, respectively.
On 2 December 2016 the applicant sent a petition (звернення) to a member of parliament, M., in which he complained, inter alia, that the material conditions in the Dnipro SIZO had deteriorated and that detainees had not been allowed to take a shower for three weeks. He requested M. to assist with arranging an inspection of the SIZO. On 22 December 2016 M. asked the Prosecutor General to take the relevant measures and inform him thereof. On 19 January 2017 the regional prosecutor, to whom the petition had been forwarded, informed M. and the applicant that, following an internal inspection, the latter’s allegations had not been confirmed. Bathing facilities and laundry services for prisoners were provided in accordance with the set schedule and there were no irregularities in the functioning of the boiler facility and shower cabins.
On 23 February 2017 the applicant sent a complaint to the Prosecutor General, claiming that his complaints about the inappropriate condition of the shower cabins had not been properly examined and that the condition of some shower cabins had not been checked during the inspection. He also stated that he could take a shower only once a week.
On 31 May 2017 the regional prosecutor informed the applicant that the inspection carried out following his petition had established that washing facilities in the SIZO had been provided in accordance with the law and the set schedule. In accordance with the domestic standards, washing facilities were available at least once a week. No disruptions in the functioning of the boiler facility and washroom had been established. The sanitary and technical condition of showers had been satisfactory. Following the interviewing of other detainees, no complaints on their part had been established in this respect.
The Government stated, and the applicant did not dispute, that from November 2012 to March 2018 the latter had been transported by prison van, on 392 occasions, from the Dnipro SIZO to the District Court to participate in court hearings on his criminal case. The distance from the SIZO to the court was about 26.5 km and a one-way trip lasted from forty minutes to one and a half hours.
According to the applicant, the following vehicles were usually used for transporting detainees: a GAZ van with two cells designed for two to three and three to four detainees respectively; a GAZ van with two cells measuring 2.1 to 2.2 square metres (for six to ten detainees) and 0.4 square metres (for one detainee); a GAZ van with three cells, two of which were designed for one to two detainees and one for four to five detainees; and a GAZ van with four cells. The vans had insufficient lighting and ventilation. It was cold inside them during the winter, whilst in the summer the temperature rose to 35-40 degrees Celsius. The vans had no special space for smokers, and nonsmokers had to inhale tobacco smoke. In support of his statements the applicant submitted eight photographs of several vans, showing that some of them had no windows. He also generally referred to the NPM report for 2013 (see paragraph 47 below).
According to the Government, which referred to a letter from the National Police of Ukraine of 27 March 2018, based in turn on an inspection of 21 November 2017, the applicant had been transported in the following vehicles: a UAZ-31519 van, with one multi-prisoner cell designed for two detainees; a GAZ-27521 van, with one multi-prisoner cell for four detainees; a TK-AZU-1 van designed for transporting seven detainees, with one multi-prisoner and three single cells; a GAZ-2705-222 van designed for transporting eight detainees, with two multi-prisoner cells; a Foton-BL 1043 van, designed for transporting twelve detainees, with one multi-prisoner, two two-prisoner and three single cells; and a GAZ-3307 van, designed for transporting twenty-one detainees, with one multiprisoner, two two-prisoner and two four-prisoner cells. The abovementioned vehicles had been constructed in accordance with domestic and international standards. Each cell in them was equipped with artificial lighting, which was always turned on during the transfer. The ventilation of the cells was achieved by means of vents installed in the body of the vehicles; these could be regulated by prisoners in order to get access to air. The upper and lower parts of the cell doors consisted of grates through which access to air was also ensured. The vans were equipped with heaters. The 2017 records stated that ventilation and heating systems had been “available” in the prison vans, and that the ventilation system had been “functioning” in one van and the heating system in three vans.
On arrival at the District Court, the applicant was held in cells located in the holding area, where there was a room for convoy officers, three holding cells for detainees and a toilet facility. The Government stated, and the applicant did not dispute, that the cells measured 6 square metres each, were equipped with benches and had artificial lighting.
According to the applicant, there was no access to fresh air and natural light, no artificial ventilation and no tables in the holding cells. Detainees were allowed to go to the toilet only with the permission of a convoy officer when there were two to three officers in the holding area. From three to seven detainees were usually held in the holding cells. On hearing days the applicant remained in the court for most of the day, since a van collected detainees from the SIZO at 8.30 a.m., but hearings did not begin until 2.20 to 2.30 p.m. and finished at 5.30 p.m., after which the van went back to the SIZO.
In support of his statements, the applicant submitted four photographs of the holding cells. He also referred to a letter from the State Judicial Administration of 25 May 2015, which confirmed that there had been no artificial ventilation in those cells. The applicant also referred to the NPM reports for 2013 and 2014 (see paragraph 47 below).
Relevant excerpts from the CPT’s General Reports read as follows:
“46. Overcrowding is an issue of direct relevance to the CPT’s mandate. All the services and activities within a prison will be adversely affected if it is required to cater for more prisoners than it was designed to accommodate; the overall quality of life in the establishment will be lowered, perhaps significantly. Moreover, the level of overcrowding in a prison, or in a particular part of it, might be such as to be in itself inhuman or degrading from a physical standpoint.
A satisfactory programme of activities (work, education, sport, etc.) is of crucial importance for the well-being of prisoners ... [P]risoners cannot simply be left to languish for weeks, possibly months, locked up in their cells, and this regardless of how good material conditions might be within the cells. The CPT considers that one should aim at ensuring that prisoners in remand establishments are able to spend a reasonable part of the day (8 hours or more) outside their cells, engaged in purposeful activity of a varied nature ...
Specific mention should be made of outdoor exercise. The requirement that prisoners be allowed at least one hour of exercise in the open air every day is widely accepted as a basic safeguard ... It is also axiomatic that outdoor exercise facilities should be reasonably spacious and whenever possible offer shelter from inclement weather ...
Ready access to proper toilet facilities and the maintenance of good standards of hygiene are essential components of a humane environment ...
The CPT would add that it is particularly concerned when it finds a combination of overcrowding, poor regime activities and inadequate access to toilet/washing facilities in the same establishment. The cumulative effect of such conditions can prove extremely detrimental to prisoners ...”
“13. As the CPT pointed out in its 2nd General Report, prison overcrowding is an issue of direct relevance to the Committee’s mandate (cf. CPT/Inf (92) 3, paragraph 46). An overcrowded prison entails cramped and unhygienic accommodation; a constant lack of privacy (even when performing such basic tasks as using a sanitary facility); reduced out-of-cell activities, due to demand outstripping the staff and facilities available; overburdened health-care services; increased tension and hence more violence between prisoners and between prisoners and staff. This list is far from exhaustive.
The CPT has been led to conclude on more than one occasion that the adverse effects of overcrowding have resulted in inhuman and degrading conditions of detention ...”
“28. The phenomenon of prison overcrowding continues to blight penitentiary systems across Europe and seriously undermines attempts to improve conditions of detention. The negative effects of prison overcrowding have already been highlighted in previous General Reports. As the CPT’s field of operations has extended throughout the European continent, the Committee has encountered huge incarceration rates and resultant severe prison overcrowding. The fact that a State locks up so many of its citizens cannot be convincingly explained away by a high crime rate; the general outlook of members of the law enforcement agencies and the judiciary must, in part, be responsible.
In such circumstances, throwing increasing amounts of money at the prison estate will not offer a solution. Instead, current law and practice in relation to custody pending trial and sentencing as well as the range of non-custodial sentences available need to be reviewed. This is precisely the approach advocated in Committee of Ministers Recommendation No R (99) 22 on prison overcrowding and prison population inflation. The CPT very much hopes that the principles set out in that important text will indeed be applied by member States; the implementation of this Recommendation deserves to be closely monitored by the Council of Europe.
In a number of countries visited by the CPT, particularly in central and eastern Europe, inmate accommodation often consists of large capacity dormitories which contain all or most of the facilities used by prisoners on a daily basis, such as sleeping and living areas as well as sanitary facilities. The CPT has objections to the very principle of such accommodation arrangements in closed prisons and those objections are reinforced when, as is frequently the case, the dormitories in question are found to hold prisoners under extremely cramped and insalubrious conditions ... Large-capacity dormitories inevitably imply a lack of privacy for prisoners in their everyday lives ... All these problems are exacerbated when the numbers held go beyond a reasonable occupancy level; further, in such a situation the excessive burden on communal facilities such as washbasins or lavatories and the insufficient ventilation for so many persons will often lead to deplorable conditions.
The CPT frequently encounters devices, such as metal shutters, slats, or plates fitted to cell windows, which deprive prisoners of access to natural light and prevent fresh air from entering the accommodation. They are a particularly common feature of establishments holding pre-trial prisoners. The CPT fully accepts that specific security measures designed to prevent the risk of collusion and/or criminal activities may well be required in respect of certain prisoners ... [E]ven when such measures are required, they should never involve depriving the prisoners concerned of natural light and fresh air. The latter are basic elements of life which every prisoner is entitled to enjoy; moreover, the absence of these elements generates conditions favourable to the spread of diseases and in particular tuberculosis ...”
Since 1 September 1997, when the European Convention for the Prevention of Torture and Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment entered into force in respect of Ukraine, CPT delegations have visited various detention facilities in Ukraine, including the Dnipro SIZO (in 2009 and 2013). Thus, in its 2011 Report () prepared following the visit to Ukraine on 8-21 September 2009, the CPT noted as follows (original emphasis; footnotes omitted):
“107. ... The CPT recommends that the Ukrainian authorities make strenuous efforts to offer organised out-of-cell activities (work, recreation/association, education, sport) to prisoners at the Kyiv SIZO. Further, the Committee recommends that steps be taken to construct more appropriate exercise yards which allow prisoners to exert themselves physically, as well as indoor and outdoor sports facilities ...
When visited by the delegation, the SIZO in Dnipropetrovsk was holding 2,900 prisoners (including 220 women and 63 juveniles) for an official capacity of 3,456. The prisoner population comprised 26 life-sentenced prisoners. The SIZO served as a transit point for prisoners being transferred between penitentiary establishments and had a monthly turnover of some 5,000 inmates.
Prisoners were accommodated in 10 buildings of different age and configuration. Given that the visit to the establishment was of a targeted nature – focusing on newly arrived prisoners and life-sentenced prisoners – the delegation received an impression of material conditions only in some of the buildings.
In a detention block which had recently been renovated (units 6 and 7), cells measuring some 7 m² were holding usually 2, but occasionally 3, prisoners. There was enough natural light coming through the cells’ large windows, and access to artificial light and ventilation also appeared to be adequate. Each cell was equipped with a partitioned toilet and sink. This block, referred to as the “Euro-standard” block, was considered by the administration as a model.
In the four-storey building accommodating female prisoners (unit 10) and some of the male remand prisoners (unit 9), the delegation observed that the cells were less overcrowded than in the Kyiv SIZO (e.g. a cell measuring some 15 m² was holding 6 female prisoners; there were 13 prisoners in a cell of 33 m²). The cell equipment (double-bunk beds, lockers, a partitioned sanitary annexe) did not call for any particular comments. However, it was a matter of concern to the delegation that all cells’ windows were fitted with a solid metal shutter which considerably limited access to natural light. The CPT welcomes the immediate steps taken by the management of the SIZO to remove the metal shutters from all the cell windows in units 9 and 10, following a remark by the delegation at the end of the visit to the SIZO in Dnipropetrovsk.
The CPT recommends that, at the Dnipropetrovsk SIZO, efforts be made to decrease overcrowding, the objective being to offer a minimum of 4 m² of living space per prisoner in multi-occupancy cells.
As at the Kyiv SIZO, the vast majority of prisoners spent almost all their time locked up in their cells, without being offered any activities worthy of the name. The first recommendation made in paragraph 107 applies equally to the Dnipropetrovsk SIZO.”
The CPT also made the following general recommendations to the Ukrainian authorities:
“- the examination of proposals to amend the Code of Criminal Procedure and the Criminal Code to be considered a priority, the aim being to shorten the length of court proceedings in criminal cases and to circumscribe more closely the circumstances in which recourse can be had to the preventive measure of remand in custody ...
- efforts to be made to develop the training provided to judges and prosecutors, with a view to promoting the use of alternatives to imprisonment ...
- in their endeavours to combat prison overcrowding, the Ukrainian authorities should be guided by Recommendation Rec(99)22 of the Committee of Ministers of the Council of Europe concerning prison overcrowding and prison population inflation, Recommendation Rec(2000)22 on improving the implementation of the European rules on community sanctions and measures, Recommendation Rec(2003)22 on conditional release (parole) and Recommendation Rec(2006)13 on the use of remand in custody, the conditions in which it takes place and the provision of safeguards against abuse ...
- the Ukrainian authorities to review as soon as possible the norms fixed by legislation for living space per prisoner, ensuring that they provide for at least 4 m² per inmate in multi-occupancy cells in all the establishments under the authority of the Department on Enforcement of Sentences (SIZOs included ...
- the Ukrainian authorities to step up their efforts to develop the programmes of activities for sentenced and remand prisoners. The aim should be to ensure that both categories of prisoner are able to spend a reasonable part of the day (8 hours or more) outside their cells, engaged in purposeful activity of a varied nature ...”
In its 2014 Report () prepared following the visit to Ukraine on 9-21 October 2013, the CPT noted as follows (original emphasis; footnotes omitted):
“118. The CPT’s delegation paid follow-up visits to Kyiv, Dnipropetrovsk, Odessa and Simferopol SIZOs, where remand prisoners/inmates not yet serving their sentences represented about 90% or more of the whole prison population in these establishments. It should be noted from the outset that these establishments were operating below their official capacities at the time of the 2013 visit, although these capacities were still based on the national standard of 2.5 m² of living space per inmate: ...
● Dnipropetrovsk SIZO was accommodating 1,777 inmates (including 129 women and 24 juveniles) for an official capacity of 3,519 places; ...
The CPT is pleased to note that in the establishments visited, all the inmates appeared to have been provided with their own beds in the cells seen by the delegation. Further, the standard advocated by the Committee of 4 m² of living space per inmate in multi-occupancy cells was observed in many cells of the establishments concerned. Both penitentiary staff and prisoners with whom the delegation spoke expressed their appreciation about the significant reduction of the prison population and the larger amount of living space in the cells in the context of the adoption and entry into force of the new CCP.
Nevertheless, ... the CPT’s delegation observed localised overcrowding in all the establishments visited. Cell occupancy rates in many cells were not only far from meeting the CPT’s standard of at least 4 m² per prisoner, but were also in breach of Ukrainian standards, with as little as 1.5 m² of living space per prisoner in some multi-occupancy cells (e.g. 38 prisoners were being held in a cell of some 57 m², without counting the space taken up by the in-cell toilet, in Kyiv SIZO; four prisoners were being accommodated in a cell of some 7 m², not including the space taken up by the in-cell toilet, at Odessa) ...
The delegation noted that at Dnipropetrovsk SIZO, metal shutters attached to the cells’ windows in blocks Nos. 9 and 10 had been removed following the 2009 visit. Steps were also being taken to pursue gradual renovation works in the cells; most of the accommodation areas were indeed in a poor state of repair, badly ventilated and dirty. Further, in-cell toilets were only partially partitioned ...
outdoor exercise
In all the SIZOs visited, inmates had access to one hour of daily outdoor exercise (two hours for juveniles). Nevertheless, the yards seen by the CPT’s delegation were frequently too small for their intended occupancy and for real physical exertion (e.g. 9.5 m² for up to two inmates or 34 m² for up to 12 prisoners in Kyiv) ...
activity programmes
The philosophy behind the detention regime applicable to remand prisoners is set out in Section 7 of the Pre-Trial Detention Act. More specifically, the main characteristics of the detention regime are the “isolation” of remand prisoners, their constant supervision and the observance of the segregation rules. Accordingly, the activities which remand prisoners are entitled to consist mainly of watching TV (when a TV set is provided), playing board games, reading books/magazines and having access to religious literature.
Newly adopted Internal Rules on SIZOs indicate that remand prisoners may have access to general education regardless of their age. However, if a remand prisoner wishes to work, an authorisation from an investigator or judge should be sought ...
In the course of the 2013 visit, the delegation found that there was virtually no change as regards the provision of out-of-cell activities for remand prisoners. Most remand prisoners were locked up in their cells for 23 hours per day, with little to occupy themselves (e.g. watching TV or reading books). Only a few women on remand were allowed to work (e.g. in Kyiv) and none of the prisoners interviewed were offered any kind of educational activities. As on previous visits, the only exception concerned juveniles on remand, who had access to some schooling, association and sports activities during weekdays ...
conclusions
The delegation’s findings during the 2013 visit clearly indicate that the adoption/entry into force of the new CCP and other recent measures had contributed to the eradication of massive, severe, overcrowding in the establishments visited. The Ukrainian authorities should be commended for this. However, overcrowding remains an issue for many inmates who still enjoy an extremely limited amount of living space (i.e. far lower than 4 m² per inmate) in cells which were often found to be in a poor condition. In addition, the bulk of remand prisoners were confined to such cells for at least 23 hours a day, with no meaningful out-of-cell activities on offer and little incentive to take daily outdoor exercise. In addition, few of them had opportunities to maintain contacts with their relatives. This situation was aggravated for a number of prisoners who were still being held in such a situation for several years under the former CCP. In short, the cumulative effect of these conditions and restrictions could well be considered, for many inmates, as a form of inhuman and degrading treatment.
In the light of the above remarks, the CPT recommends that ... the Ukrainian authorities take further action to:
● redouble their efforts in the SIZOs visited to meet the objective of offering at least 4 m² of living space per inmate in multi-occupancy cells and of placing no more than one inmate in cells measuring 6 m² (not counting the area taken up by the in-cell toilets), in particular by distributing prisoners more evenly amongst the available accommodation, reducing intended capacity levels in the cells in compliance with national standards and reviewing the official capacities of the establishments in question accordingly; ...
● pursue their refurbishment/reconstruction programmes in older accommodation buildings of Kyiv and Dnipropetrovsk SIZOs; ...
● ensure, when implementing refurbishment/(re)construction programmes, that in-cell toilets/sanitary annexes are fully partitioned (i.e. up to the ceiling); ...
● ensure that prisoners have the possibility of genuine physical exertion every day; this will require enlarging the exercise yards. Whenever possible, the current yards located on the roofs of the accommodation blocks should be replaced by outdoor exercise facilities located at ground level;
● ... steps should be taken to ensure that, when designing and constructing new SIZOs/accommodation blocks for remand prisoners, provision is made for proper outdoor exercise at ground level, association with prisoners from other cells, work, education and other meaningful activities ...”
The CPT has also repeatedly acknowledged general problems concerning conditions of detention in Ukraine. In particular, in its 2017 Report () prepared following its visit to Ukraine on 2130 November 2016, it stated that it had been informed by the Ukrainian authorities about the ongoing re-organisation of the prison system and of measures taken to reduce prison overcrowding. In particular, the authorities planned to close down some of the old SIZOs and to sell the old buildings and the land to private investors who would then build new remand prisons. The CPT welcomed the reforms, but urged the authorities to pursue their efforts to further reduce the number of remand prisoners. It observed:
The CPT thus called upon the Ukrainian authorities to take decisive steps to revise the legislation and the regime for remand prisoners. It also observed (original emphasis, footnotes omitted):
“... the most striking feature of the SIZOs visited were the appalling material conditions, in particular at Odesa, Khmelnytskiy and Kyiv SIZOs (with the notable positive exception of the juvenile units at Khmelnytskiy and Kyiv SIZOs). Those in Kyiv and Odesa had further deteriorated since the CPT’s last visits in, respectively, September 2014 and October 2013 and could now easily be considered inhuman and degrading. The above-mentioned situation was made even worse by the fact that the heating was either completely switched off or barely working.
Conditions were somewhat better at Kharkiv SIZO although they remained quite poor due to the age and infrastructure of the buildings. The Committee recommends that the ongoing renovation of Kharkiv SIZO be continued and that, to the extent possible with the existing infrastructure, it comprise the transformation of large-capacity cells into smaller living units. Such transformation should also be the objective for all the other SIZOs (and, as applicable, all the other penitentiary establishments) in Ukraine.
Further, it is a matter of serious concern for the CPT that, in all the SIZOs visited, remand prisoners were usually not offered any out-of-cell activities other than outdoor exercise for one hour per day.”
Most recently, in the 2018 Report () prepared following its visit to Ukraine on 8-21 December 2017, the CPT stated as follows (original emphasis; footnotes omitted):
“9. ... the CPT is very concerned to note that, after its 7th periodic visit to Ukraine (and 14 visits altogether), little or no action has been taken to implement several of its long-standing recommendations concerning in particular the prison system, especially as regards material conditions, the legal norm of living space for remand prisoners, the regime for remand prisoners ...
The CPT must stress that if no progress is made to implement its recommendations, the Committee might have to consider having recourse to Article 10, paragraph 2, of the Convention. However, the CPT hopes that decisive action by the Ukrainian authorities to implement its recommendations will render such a step unnecessary ...
The delegation carried out a follow-up visit to Kyiv Pre-Trial Detention Centre (hereafter Kyiv SIZO); further, first-time visits were carried out to Chernivtsi Penitentiary Institution No. 33 (hereafter Chernivtsi SIZO), Ivano-Frankivsk Penitentiary Institution No. 12 (hereafter Ivano-Frankivsk SIZO), Lviv Penitentiary Institution No. 19 (hereafter Lviv SIZO) ...
A general description of Kyiv SIZO can be found in the reports on previous visits. At the time of the 2017 visit, the establishment was accommodating 2,371 inmates ... and had the official capacity of 2,474. However, this capacity included the former women’s block which was out of service due to fire damage; in fact, the establishment had 2,200 operational places which meant that it was officially overcrowded.
Chernivtsi SIZO is an old Austrian-built prison, a listed monument located in centre of town. It was opened in 1819, partly damaged during WW2 and extensively refurbished in the 1950s (when electricity, sewage and central heating were installed). With the official capacity of 304, the establishment was accommodating 198 inmates living in a single detention block (with two floors) ...
Ivano-Frankivsk SIZO, brought into service in 1918, is located in the centre of town on a relatively small area adjoining to the city’s police headquarters, the prosecutor’s office and the court. The establishment has the official capacity of 401 and was accommodating 380 prisoners ...
Lviv SIZO, located in the city centre and with the official capacity of 900, occupies a former monastery built in the 17th century and transformed into a prison in 1784. A listed monument composed of two 3-storey detention blocks and several adjoining buildings (administration, health-care unit, kitchen, etc.), it was accommodating 821 prisoners ...
At the outset of the visit, the delegation was informed by senior officials from the Ministry of Justice about the progress of prison reform which inter alia included the drafting of new legislation (e.g. the new draft Penitentiary Service Act which would define anew the mission of the Service and put more stress on the objective of prisoner rehabilitation, draft new house rules for SIZOs and colonies, draft legislation facilitating early release and setting up probation service) and preparation of a document called ‘Passport for reforms’ containing the aims of further reforms of the prison system.
Unfortunately, most of these measures were still at an early stage of adoption and/or implementation and the aforementioned draft legislation was under consideration by the Rada with no clear indication as to when it would be adopted. Meanwhile, since the repeal of the ‘Savchenko Act’ in May 2017, the prison population had reportedly started growing again – especially in SIZOs, some of which were again overcrowded even as compared with the official norm of living space per prisoner (e.g. in Kyiv, see paragraph 54 above). The Ministry of Justice tried to take measures to tackle this trend e.g. by planning to open new remand units in some of the colonies with spare accommodation.
The situation was rendered even more difficult by the fact that – despite very poor, sometimes indeed appalling (see paragraph 62 below) conditions of detention in prisons – the Ministry had close to no budget for refurbishment and repairs, forcing the establishments’ Directors to seek funds by themselves, from private sponsors, municipalities and charities, and even from inmates’ (and their families’) own resources. The 2018 budget of the prison service was actually lower than in 2017, despite the population increase and ongoing deterioration of material conditions. Furthermore, implementation of the plans regarding prison estate (described in ... the report on the 2016 ad hoc visit) had hardly progressed.
The CPT wishes to stress that it is fully aware of the overall difficulties and challenges facing Ukraine. However, given the dramatic situation in at least some of the penitentiary establishments visited, the Committee is of the view that real action is urgently required to bring about a positive change for the prison system.
In the light of the fact found during this visit, and especially as concerns Kyiv SIZO which was the subject of an immediate observation ..., the CPT calls upon the Ukrainian authorities to attach the highest priority to the implementation of all the measures mentioned in paragraph 55 above. This will necessitate putting in place a proper inter-agency co-ordination (including the Ministry of Finance) and a realistic action plan with precise deadlines and allocated budget.
The Committee also urges the Ukrainian authorities to pursue their efforts to reduce prisoner population, in particular by making more use of the available alternatives to remand detention.
Regarding the situation of remand prisoners, the CPT regrets that the inadequate norm of living space per inmate in SIZOs (2.5 m²) is still in force. Further, there has still been no change to the regime for remand prisoners based on the concept of ‘isolation’, with no association between cells and nothing even remotely resembling a programme of meaningful out-of-cell activities. The Committee calls upon the Ukrainian authorities to take decisive steps to revise the legislation and regime for remand prisoners, taking into account the above remarks and the Committee’s longstanding recommendations ...
The most striking feature of the establishments visited (all of them except Kremenchuk Juvenile Colony ...) were the generally poor or even appalling material conditions, in particular in Kyiv and Lviv.
The situation at Kyiv SIZO had even worsened since the CPT’s November 2016 visit, because ... it was now overcrowded (even according to the national norm of 2.5 m² of living space per remand prisoner) and there were some cells with more inmates than beds (e.g. cells nos. 21 and 32), obliging prisoners to sleep in shifts. Despite sporadic efforts to carry out small repairs (usually using inmates’ own resources), the detention blocks had further deteriorated, with cells being poorly lit, poorly ventilated, often extremely dilapidated and dirty (the most so in the “quarantine” and transit units), and with the whole infrastructure (electricity, water, sewage) close to total breakdown.
In short, for the bulk of the prisoner population (except women and juveniles) conditions at Kyiv SIZO could easily be considered as inhuman and degrading.
... at the end of the visit the delegation invoked Article 8, paragraph 5, of the Convention and requested the Ukrainian authorities to provide the Committee, within 3 months, with a detailed action plan, comprising precise deadlines and financial allocations, to address the situation at Kyiv SIZO.
In their letter dated 5 April 2018, the Ukrainian authorities informed the CPT of steps taken and planned in response to the aforementioned immediate observation. This included carrying out a technical assessment, drawing up detailed reconstruction plans and preparing cost estimates for addressing all deficiencies in the material conditions at Kyiv SIZO. The Committee welcomes these plans but notes with regret that no concrete financial resources seem to have been allocated to implement these works, which are mentioned as conditional upon receipt of funds and without any precise timelines for completion.
In the light of the indeed totally unacceptable situation at Kyiv SIZO, the CPT calls upon the Ukrainian authorities to reconstruct/refurbish Kyiv SIZO without further delay. In this context, steps must also be taken to ensure that every prisoner has his own bed.
The material conditions at Lviv SIZO were determined to a large extent by the obsolete infrastructure of the ages-old buildings, and the situation was compounded by a total absence of budget for repairs, resulting inter alia in repeated breakdowns of power and water supply.
Cells were generally dilapidated and so were the furniture, mattresses and bedsheets. Further, some of the cells were stuffy and humid, especially the larger ones. In many of the cells, conditions were cramped (e.g. 14 inmates sharing a cell measuring some 50 m², including sanitary annexe; six inmates living in a cell measuring some 16 m²) and both the access to natural light and artificial lighting left much to be desired.
On the positive side, the cells were mostly clean. Conditions were somewhat better in the cells for women and juveniles (which had in-cell showers and were not overcrowded).
According to the Director of Lviv SIZO, talks were ongoing with the city’s Mayor’s Office and with a private investor in order to close the prison and move it to a new purpose-built facility in the outskirts of town. The Committee would like to receive more information on these plans and prospects for their implementation ...
Material conditions were somewhat better at Chernivtsi and Ivano-Frankivsk SIZOs which were less overcrowded.
Thanks to strenuous efforts of its Director to search for donors, prisoner accommodation at Chernivtsi SIZO was being refurbished gradually (approximately 40% of all the cells had been refurbished so far) and conditions in already refurbished cells were quite good including fully partitioned sanitary annexes and even (in some cells, mostly for women and juveniles) showers. The unrefurbished cells were dilapidated (but clean), as were collective showers. The Director told the delegation that central heating and sewage system required urgent repairs but the establishment had no budget for this, as well as to replace old and broken furniture. However, the biggest problem was the leaking roof which quickly ruined any positive effects of refurbishment carried out in the cells.
Evidence of recent repairs was also visible at Ivano-Frankivsk SIZO (likewise, only because the Director had managed to secure help from the municipality and some local companies), and a few of the cells had been redecorated with the help of the inmates. However, most of the prisoner accommodation was run down (including the furniture), with cells being quite stuffy, dark and not very clean.
... the CPT calls upon the Ukrainian authorities to urgently allocate sufficient State budget resources to Lviv, Chernivtsi and Ivano-Frankivsk SIZOs ... and to proceed without delay with refurbishment/reconstruction of these establishments so as to address the above-described deficiencies; this should include, wherever applicable, transforming large-capacity dormitories into smaller cells. Reference is also made to the recommendation i[n] paragraph 57 above ...
Most of the in-cell toilets in the prisons visited were still only partially screened. Further, as a rule, inmates had access to a shower only once a week, hygiene items (other than soap) were not provided free of charge and, in all the establishments visited except in Kremenchuk, the delegation heard complaints from prisoners about poor quality of the food. The CPT recommends that steps be taken to address these deficiencies ...
The CPT’s long-standing recommendation to develop a regime for remand prisoners remains, regrettably, unimplemented (see also paragraph 57 above).
As during the previous visits, the vast majority of remand prisoners spent up to 23 hours a day locked up inside their cells with no organised activities. Inmates had access to outdoor exercise for one hour per day (two hours for women and juveniles) in small, oppressive and dilapidated yards which were, moreover, usually located on the roofs of detention blocks and offered nothing but sky view.
The only other distractions for remand prisoners were watching TV or listening to the radio in their cells, reading books and newspapers, and playing board games with their cellmates ...
... The CPT calls upon the Ukrainian authorities to intensify their efforts to develop the programmes of activities for both sentenced and remand prisoners, notably as regards work, educational and vocational activities ...
The Committee also calls upon the Ukrainian authorities to take steps without further delay, in the SIZOs visited (and in all remand prisons in general), to enlarge and improve exercise yards ...”
On 30 September 1999 the Committee of Ministers adopted  concerning prison overcrowding and prison population inflation, which provides in particular as follows:
“Considering that prison overcrowding and prison population growth represent a major challenge to prison administrations and the criminal justice system as a whole, both in terms of human rights and of the efficient management of penal institutions;
Considering that the efficient management of the prison population is contingent on such matters as the overall crime situation, priorities in crime control, the range of penalties available on the law books, the severity of the sentences imposed, the frequency of use of community sanctions and measures, the use of pre-trial detention, the effectiveness and efficiency of criminal justice agencies and not least public attitudes towards crime and punishment ...
Recommends that governments of member states:
- take all appropriate measures, when reviewing their legislation and practice in relation to prison overcrowding and prison population inflation, to apply the principles set out in the appendix to this recommendation ...
Basic principles
Deprivation of liberty should be regarded as a sanction or measure of last resort and should therefore be provided for only, where the seriousness of the offence would make any other sanction or measure clearly inadequate.
The extension of the prison estate should rather be an exceptional measure, as it is generally unlikely to offer a lasting solution to the problem of overcrowding. Countries whose prison capacity may be sufficient in overall terms but poorly adapted to local needs should try to achieve a more rational distribution of prison capacity ...
Coping with a shortage of prison places
In order to avoid excessive levels of overcrowding a maximum capacity for penal institutions should be set.
Where conditions of overcrowding occur, special emphasis should be placed on the precepts of human dignity, the commitment of prison administrations to apply humane and positive treatment, the full recognition of staff roles and effective modem management approaches. In conformity with the European Prison Rules, particular attention should be paid to the amount of space available to prisoners, to hygiene and sanitation, to the provision of sufficient and suitably prepared and presented food, to prisoners’ health care and to the opportunity for outdoor exercise ...
Measures relating to the pre-trial stage
Avoiding criminal proceedings - Reducing recourse to pre-trial detention
Appropriate measures should be taken with a view to fully implementing the principles laid down in Recommendation No R (87) 18 concerning the simplification of criminal justice, this would involve in particular that member states, while taking into account their own constitutional principles or legal tradition, resort to the principle of discretionary prosecution (or measures having the same purpose) and make use of simplified procedures and out-of-court settlements as alternatives to prosecution in suitable cases, in order to avoid full criminal proceedings.
The application of pre-trial detention and its length should be reduced to the minimum compatible with the interests of justice. To this effect, member states should ensure that their law and practice are in conformity with the relevant provisions of the European Convention on Human Rights and the case-law of its control organs, and be guided by the principles set out in Recommendation No R (80) 11 concerning custody pending trial, in particular as regards the grounds on which pre-trial detention can be ordered.
The widest possible use should be made of alternatives to pre-trial detention, such as the requirement of the suspected offender to reside at a specified address, a restriction on leaving or entering a specified place without authorisation, the provision of bail or supervision and assistance by an agency specified by the judicial authority. In this connection attention should be paid to the possibilities for supervising a requirement to remain in a specified place through electronic surveillance devices.
In order to assist the efficient and humane use of pre-trial detention, adequate financial and human resources should be made available and appropriate procedural means and managerial techniques be developed, as necessary.”
On 11 January 2006 the Committee of Ministers revised the European Prison Rules (), originally adopted on 12 February 1987. These are its recommendations to member States of the Council of Europe on the minimum standards to be applied to persons held in pre-trial detention and to convicted persons. They provide, in so far as relevant, as follows:
“1. All persons deprived of their liberty shall be treated with respect for their human rights.
Persons deprived of their liberty retain all rights that are not lawfully taken away by the decision sentencing them or remanding them in custody.
Restrictions placed on persons deprived of their liberty shall be the minimum necessary and proportionate to the legitimate objective for which they are imposed.
Prison conditions that infringe prisoners’ human rights are not justified by lack of resources ...
Allocation and accommodation
...
1. The accommodation provided for prisoners, and in particular all sleeping accommodation, shall respect human dignity and, as far as possible, privacy, and meet the requirements of health and hygiene, due regard being paid to climatic conditions and especially to floor space, cubic content of air, lighting, heating and ventilation.
2. In all buildings where prisoners are required to live, work or congregate:
the windows shall be large enough to enable the prisoners to read or work by natural light in normal conditions and shall allow the entrance of fresh air except where there is an adequate air conditioning system;
artificial light shall satisfy recognised technical standards; and
there shall be an alarm system that enables prisoners to contact the staff without delay.
3. Specific minimum requirements in respect of the matters referred to in paragraphs 1 and 2 shall be set in national law.
4. National law shall provide mechanisms for ensuring that these minimum requirements are not breached by the overcrowding of prisons.
5. Prisoners shall normally be accommodated during the night in individual cells except where it is preferable for them to share sleeping accommodation.
6. Accommodation shall only be shared if it is suitable for this purpose and shall be occupied by prisoners suitable to associate with each other.
7. As far as possible, prisoners shall be given a choice before being required to share sleeping accommodation.
8. In deciding to accommodate prisoners in particular prisons or in particular sections of a prison due account shall be taken of the need to detain:
untried prisoners separately from sentenced prisoners;
male prisoners separately from females; and
young adult prisoners separately from older prisoners.
9. Exceptions can be made to the requirements for separate detention in terms of paragraph 8 in order to allow prisoners to participate jointly in organised activities, but these groups shall always be separated at night unless they consent to be detained together and the prison authorities judge that it would be in the best interest of all the prisoners concerned.
10. Accommodation of all prisoners shall be in conditions with the least restrictive security arrangements compatible with the risk of their escaping or harming themselves or others.
Hygiene
1. All parts of every prison shall be properly maintained and kept clean at all times.
2. When prisoners are admitted to prison the cells or other accommodation to which they are allocated shall be clean.
3. Prisoners shall have ready access to sanitary facilities that are hygienic and respect privacy.
4. Adequate facilities shall be provided so that every prisoner may have a bath or shower, at a temperature suitable to the climate, if possible daily but at least twice a week (or more frequently if necessary) in the interest of general hygiene.
5. Prisoners shall keep their persons, clothing and sleeping accommodation clean and tidy.
6. The prison authorities shall provide them with the means for doing so including toiletries and general cleaning implements and materials.
7. Special provision shall be made for the sanitary needs of women.
Exercise and recreation
1. Every prisoner shall be provided with the opportunity of at least one hour of exercise every day in the open air, if the weather permits.
2. When the weather is inclement alternative arrangements shall be made to allow prisoners to exercise.
3. Properly organised activities to promote physical fitness and provide for adequate exercise and recreational opportunities shall form an integral part of prison regimes.
4. Prison authorities shall facilitate such activities by providing appropriate installations and equipment.
5. Prison authorities shall make arrangements to organise special activities for those prisoners who need them.
6. Recreational opportunities, which include sport, games, cultural activities, hobbies and other leisure pursuits, shall be provided and, as far as possible, prisoners shall be allowed to organise them.
7. Prisoners shall be allowed to associate with each other during exercise and in order to take part in recreational activities ...”
The issue of conditions of detention in Ukraine (examined within the so-called Nevmerzhitsky, Yakovenko, Logvinenko, Isayev and Melnik groups of cases) has been on the agenda of the Committee of Ministers for many years. Pursuant to Article 46 § 2 of the Convention, the Committee of Ministers has considered measures adopted by the Ukrainian authorities with a view to complying with the Court’s relevant judgments.
Thus, during the 1144th meeting held on 4-6 June 2012, Ministers’ Deputies adopted the following decision ():
invited the Ukrainian authorities to provide urgently a comprehensive action plan aimed at responding to the structural problems highlighted by the Court in respect of conditions of detention..., as well as aimed at setting up effective remedies in respect thereof ...
During the 1288th meeting of the Ministers’ Deputies held on 67 June 2017, the Committee of Ministers adopted the following decision ():
“The Deputies
...
noted the authorities’ commitment to adopting comprehensive measures to resolve the complex issues raised by these judgments and the important legislative and institutional reforms underway ...
with regard to conditions of detention in pre-trial detention facilities and prisons, noted the introduction of the probation system and strongly encouraged the authorities to explore further the use of alternatives to detention to reduce overcrowding;
strongly encouraged the authorities to focus on elaborating a coherent strategy to fight overcrowding and remedy the broader shortcomings in detention conditions, drawing inspiration from the relevant recommendations of the [CPT] and the Committee of Ministers ...
noted the elaboration of a draft law aimed at introducing both preventive and compensatory remedies and strongly encouraged the authorities to continue their efforts, in the context of the on-going cooperation activities with the Council of Europe, to put in place an effective remedy or combination of remedies ...”
During the 1302nd meeting of the Ministers’ Deputies held on 57 December 2017, the Committee of Ministers adopted the following decision ():
“The Deputies
...
As regards general measures
Conditions of detention in pre-trial detention centres
noted with satisfaction the legislative and administrative measures underway to reform the penitentiary system, and in particular the efforts taken towards the full implementation of the probation system to reduce the overall prison population;
strongly encouraged the authorities to continue with these reforms and to put in place a clear global strategy to address all the deficiencies in material conditions in pre-trial detention centres taking into due consideration the recommendations of [the CPT];
Establishment of effective remedies
considered that, in light of the length of time that this issue has been pending, it is now urgent that the authorities take decisive action to establish both preventive and compensatory remedies in line with the European Court’s case law;
invited the authorities to submit full details on the content of the draft law currently pending before the Parliament, together with clarifications on the outstanding issues, by 21 December 2017 ...”
During the 1310th meeting of the Ministers’ Deputies held on 1315 March 2018, the Committee of Ministers adopted the following decision ():
“The Deputies
...
As regards general measures
noted with interest the information submitted by the authorities regarding the on-going reform of the penitentiary system; regretted however that the information submitted so far is not sufficiently detailed to demonstrate concrete results either in terms of reduction in overcrowding or improvement in material conditions of detention and access to medical care;
strongly urged the authorities to adopt a comprehensive long-term strategy capable of leading to the resolution of these problems of a structural nature, drawing due inspiration from the longstanding recommendations of the [CPT], as well as the Committee of Ministers’ recommendations in the areas concerned;
expressed profound concern that, despite the Committee’s repeated calls, the authorities have not yet taken decisive action to establish, in law and in practice, preventive and compensatory remedies in line with the European Court’s case law; considered that the lack of progress and the continuing influx of similar applications put an undue burden on the Court and undermine the credibility of the authorities’ commitment to resolve the long-standing issues identified in numerous judgments of the Court;
decided to resume examination of these groups of cases at the 1331st meeting (December 2018) (DH) at the latest and, in the event that no concrete progress has been made on the establishment of effective compensatory and preventive remedies in the meantime, instructed the Secretariat to prepare a draft interim resolution for that meeting.”
As no such progress was made and, in particular, as it appeared that the draft law previously referred to by the authorities had apparently been put aside and no concrete alternatives were under consideration (), during the 1331st meeting held on 46 December 2018 the following interim resolution () was adopted:
“The Committee of Ministers ...
Having regard to the judgments of the [Court] in the Nevmerzhitsky, Yakovenko, Logvinenko, Isayev and Melnik groups of cases against Ukraine ... transmitted to the Committee for supervision of their execution under Article 46 of the Convention;
Recalling that the problems revealed by the present cases, notably the inhuman and/or degrading treatment suffered by the applicants because of overcrowding, poor material conditions of detention ... and the lack of an effective remedy in respect thereof, for which the Court found violations of Articles 3 and 13 of the Convention, have been pending before the Committee since 2005;
Underlining that, given the structural nature of the problems arising from the judgments of these groups, and the many years that have elapsed since the issues first came to the attention of the Committee, it is of paramount importance that the authorities now take concrete and decisive steps to address all these deficiencies;
Noting with interest the adoption of the Passport for Reform, a strategy paper in which the authorities seem to have identified the main obstacles to the improvement of conditions of detention in Ukraine;
Recalling that in previous decisions the Committee has repeatedly called upon the authorities to take decisive action to establish, in law and in practice, preventive and compensatory remedies in line with the European Court’s case-law;
Noting that some steps have been taken to initiate reflection on the adoption of such remedies by the establishment of a working group but that no concrete progress in this respect has so far been reported;
STRESSED the seriousness of the implications based on the nature of the findings in the present judgments relating to the absolute prohibition of torture and illtreatment in Article 3 of the Convention;
UNDERLINED the urgent need for the authorities to follow up on their Passport for Reform and continue to work on the adoption of a comprehensive long-term strategy capable of leading to the resolution of these problems of a structural nature, with clear and binding timelines for the adoption of the relevant measures and the provision of the necessary human and financial resources;
RECALLED that the lack of concrete steps to establish effective domestic remedies for allegations of ill-treatment on account of overcrowding, poor material conditions of detention ... undermines the credibility of the authorities’ commitment to resolve these long-standing issues;
NOTED that, in view of the increasing number of applications brought before the European Court, this lack of progress also puts an additional undue burden on the Convention system;
NOTED that, in order for such remedies to be effective in practice, there should at the same time be an overall improvement of material conditions and medical care in detention;
CALLED UPON the authorities to act on their commitment to resolve the problems linked to conditions of detention and, therefore, to establish, as a matter of priority, effective domestic remedies for allegations of ill-treatment on account of overcrowding, poor material conditions ... in detention.”
On 17 December 2015 the United Nations General Assembly adopted the United Nations Standard Minimum Rules for the Treatment of Prisoners () as global key standards for the treatment of prisoners. In the relevant part they provide:
“Accommodation
...
Rule 13
All accommodation provided for the use of prisoners and in particular all sleeping accommodation shall meet all requirements of health, due regard being paid to climatic conditions and particularly to cubic content of air, minimum floor space, lighting, heating and ventilation.
Rule 14
In all places where prisoners are required to live or work:
(a) The windows shall be large enough to enable the prisoners to read or work by natural light and shall be so constructed that they can allow the entrance of fresh air whether or not there is artificial ventilation;
(b) Artificial light shall be provided sufficient for the prisoners to read or work without injury to eyesight.
Rule 15
The sanitary installations shall be adequate to enable every prisoner to comply with the needs of nature when necessary and in a clean and decent manner ...
Rule 17
All parts of a prison regularly used by prisoners shall be properly maintained and kept scrupulously clean at all times ...
Exercise and sport
Rule 23
Every prisoner who is not employed in outdoor work shall have at least one hour of suitable exercise in the open air daily if the weather permits.
Young prisoners, and others of suitable age and physique, shall receive physical and recreational training during the period of exercise. To this end, space, installations and equipment should be provided ...”
In accordance with the 2002 Optional Protocol to the United Nations Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment (“the 2002 Protocol”), which was ratified by Ukraine on 21 July 2006, the Subcommittee on Prevention of Torture (“the SPT”) established by the Protocol has carried out two visits to Ukraine (in 2011 and 2016).
In particular, in its report () following the 2011 visit, the SPT observed overcrowding in many SIZOs in Ukraine. It also considered the general material conditions of the SIZOs to be inadequate as regards minimum floor space per detainee, lighting, heating and ventilation. The general levels of hygiene, access to clean water and the conditions of toilet facilities (including lack of privacy when using the toilet) in the SIZOs gave rise to equal concerns. The exercise yards were often “small, dilapidated and bare”. The SPT recommended that Ukraine take urgent steps to reduce overcrowding in the SIZOs, prioritise the improvement of general hygiene and access to water, sanitation and personal hygiene articles in SIZOs, and conduct a nation-wide audit into their material conditions.
The question of whether the rights of detainees in Ukraine are observed has been addressed in the Ombudsman’s annual reports since 2000. In addition, since November 2012 the Ombudsman has exercised the NPM functions provided for by the 2002 Protocol. A number of issues have been raised by the Ombudsman/NPM in this respect.
In the  the NPM made the following observations in respect of the facilities visited, including the Dnipro SIZO: non-compliance with the domestic norm of 2.5 square metres of personal space per detainee in SIZOs; insufficient natural and artificial lighting in cells; absence of ventilation; excessive humidity and presence of mould in some cells.
In the  the NPM mentioned the following shortcomings, which had been identified during inspection of vehicles used for transporting arrested, detained and convicted persons: the personal space in the cells of such vehicles was less than 0.5 square metres; the height of the cell doors was less than 1.55 m; the cell doors had no ventilation grills; lighting in the cells was absent or inadequate; the cells had no heating or air conditioning systems, or they were out of order; vehicles and cells were not cleaned and the floor was covered with litter. The NPM also observed that in a number of domestic courts, the personal space in holding cells where defendants waited for their court hearings was only 0.7 to 1.5 square metres. Similar issues concerning holding cells were observed in the .
The  stated that despite the ongoing prison reform in Ukraine, systemic breaches of human rights continued to take place in the majority of penal institutions and detention facilities. Overcrowding remained one of the main issues. Other problems included unsatisfactory sanitary, hygiene and material conditions in cells; inadequate heating; lack of lighting, fresh air and drinking water; and inadequate toilet facilities, lacking privacy. Cells were often dirty and had an unpleasant odour; their walls were damp and covered with mould. Prisoners were not always provided with sleeping places or bedding; they often complained of vermin in the cells and the absence of cleaning products. The food given to detainees was insufficient and of poor quality.
The Ombudsman’s , which included a chapter on the NPM’s activities in 2017, again stated that despite the ongoing prison reform, there had been no significant improvement in the situation regarding detainees’ and prisoners’ rights. Indeed, there were signs of negative trends in that respect. Conditions of detention in pre-trial detention facilities were of particular concern. That situation could be explained by the lack of a real vision of the situation in penal institutions. There was no systematic approach to introducing changes in this field and, as a result, controversial decisions were being adopted by the authorities. In the vast majority of the facilities visited, adequate material conditions of detention were not created because the facilities were underfunded. Breaches of the domestic standards on the personal space for detainees and prisoners were repeatedly confirmed. Some cells were often left unoccupied because they required major repairs. The vast majority of SIZO multi-occupancy cells remained in a neglected state; they were covered with mould; there was no proper access to fresh air or artificial ventilation, and natural light or artificial lighting was insufficient. The equipment in the cells did not fully comply with the relevant domestic standards. In most cases, the bedding was old and worn out; some prisoners were not provided with any at all. Privacy while using the toilet was not ensured (the toilets had no doors).
In 2018 all Ukrainian SIZOs and penal institutions with SIZO functions were visited. In her , the Ombudsman observed that in almost all of them the cells did not comply with international standards of sanitation, lighting, heating and ventilation. Most cells were overcrowded (for instance, in cells designed for two persons based on the domestic standards for personal space, six or more persons were being held). Overall, inadequate conditions of detention were found in almost all SIZOs. The Ombudsman recommended that the authorities bring the domestic standards for personal space and conditions of detention in line with the European standards.
Article 28 provides that everyone has the right to respect for his or her dignity and that no one may be subjected to torture, cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment that violates his or her dignity.
Section 1 provides that detention must be based on the principles of strict observance of the Constitution of Ukraine and the requirements of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, and other international norms and standards of treatment of detainees. Deliberate acts that cause physical or mental suffering or humiliation cannot be tolerated.
Section 4 provides that persons taken into custody as a preventive measure must be held in pre-trial detention facilities, or SIZOs (слідчі ізолятори). In certain cases, such persons may be held in temporary detention facilities (ізолятори тимчасового тримання).
Section 9 provides that detainees have the right, inter alia, to one hour’s exercise per day and eight hours’ sleep. They may lodge complaints, submit requests and send letters to the State authorities and officials.
Section 11 provides that detainees must be accommodated in conditions that meet statutory sanitary and hygiene requirements. The cell space for each person must not be less than 2.5 square metres.
Under section 21 the SIZO administration must provide detainees with material and living conditions that meet the established statutory norms, and provide them with the necessary food and medical care.
Section 22 provides that prosecutors are responsible for ensuring that SIZOs comply with the relevant laws. The SIZO administration must comply with decisions and instructions issued by prosecutors in respect of conditions of detention.
Section 2 provides that prosecutors are responsible for ensuring compliance with the law during the execution of criminal sentences and oversee the application of other coercive measures related to restriction of personal freedom.
Section 26 provides that in exercising the above-mentioned function, prosecutors have the right to visit pre-trial detention facilities at any time and to interview persons held in them for the purpose of obtaining information about the conditions of their detention and treatment. They may also acquaint themselves with documentation and obtain copies of it, and verify the legality of orders, decisions and other acts issued by the relevant bodies and institutions. If the relevant legislation is not being complied with, they may demand that the officials or officers cancel those orders and decisions and eliminate any breaches of the law which they have entailed, as well as put an end to any individual unlawful action. They may demand that the prison administration provide explanations for the breaches committed and eliminate those breaches and the reasons and conditions which have contributed to such breaches. Prosecutors are responsible for holding the perpetrators liable as provided for by the law. They have the right to demand that the relevant authorities carry out inspections of pre-trial detention facilities for which they are responsible. Prosecutors carry out the above supervisory functions by way of conducting regular inspections and in response to information about alleged breaches of legislation contained in complaints or applications, or from other sources. Prosecutors’ written instructions regarding compliance with the statutory procedure and conditions of detention in SIZOs are binding and must be complied with immediately.
Article 176 of the Code of Criminal Procedure (“the CCP”) provides that a personal undertaking, personal warranty, bail, house arrest and pre-trial detention may be applied as preventive measures.
Article 183 provides that pre-trial detention is an exceptional measure. It may be applied only if the prosecutor proves that a less strict preventive measure cannot prevent the risks specified in the Code.
On 4 April 2013 the Higher Specialised Civil and Criminal Court of Ukraine sent the appellate courts an information letter, in which it gave its interpretation of the above and other relevant provisions of the Code. It stated, in particular, that pre-trial detention was an exceptional preventive measure; that in examining a request for an application or extension of pretrial detention, the courts must examine the possibility of using other (alternative) measures; and that when ordering pre-trial detention, the courts must take into account reasonable time requirements.
The Code on the Execution of Sentences (“the 2003 Code”) regulates the procedure for and conditions of the execution of criminal sentences.
Article 8 (as partly amended in 2016) provides, inter alia, that convicted persons are entitled to send proposals, applications and complaints to the administration of penal organs and institutions, their supervisory bodies, the Ombudsman, the court, the prosecutor, and other State and local self-government bodies. Relevant applications are lodged through the administration of the penal institution. As confirmation, the administration issues the convicted person with a receipt for the application. It must forward the application to the addressee within three days (and in some cases within one day) of receiving it.
Articles 51, 60-1 and 108 (as amended or introduced between 2014 and 2016) extended the rights of persons sentenced to detention (арешт) (one type of criminal sentence) to spend money on the purchase of food and necessities and to receive visitors. It provided for a compulsory social and pension insurance for those sentenced to a restriction of liberty (another type of criminal sentence); and eliminated restrictions on the purchasing of food, clothes, shoes, laundry and necessities by convicted persons.
The 2013 Regulations reiterate and further specify the provisions of the Pre-trial Detention Act in respect of the procedure for and conditions of detention in SIZOs.
In particular, detainees have, inter alia, the right to an hour’s daily exercise; to send complaints, applications and letters to State bodies and officials; to live in conditions that are in accordance with the rules on sanitation and hygiene; and to be provided with free hot meals three times a day, with an individual sleeping area, bedding and other household items, and with personal hygiene products.
On 13 September 2017 the Government (Cabinet of Ministers) of Ukraine approved the Concept of Reform (Development) of the Prison System of Ukraine (“the 2017 Concept”), which set out the general principles underlying the reform and functioning of the prison system in Ukraine.
The 2017 Concept acknowledged that the existing penal system did not fully conform to the principles of humanism and respect for human rights, and that conditions of detention in Ukraine needed to be brought in line with European standards. It stated that most of the penal institutions were in an unsatisfactory condition and some were in a critical condition, which was why standards of detention were not being complied with. The main problems were lack of natural light and artificial lighting in cells; lack of automatic ventilation; lack of regular access to drinking water; insufficient washstands; excessive damp and presence of mould, and so on. Most SIZOs were very old: 12% of them were built more than 200 years ago, 58% from 100 to 200 years ago, 14% from fifty to 100 years ago, and 14% from ten to fifty years ago. Given how long they had been in use, they were seriously dilapidated and obsolete. Only between 2015 and the first quarter of 2017 had the number of persons held in prisons decreased by a factor of 1.4 (from 57,396 to 41,800 persons), whereas the number held in SIZOs had increased by a factor of 1.2 (from 16,035 to 18,821 persons). Chronic underfunding of the penal system by the State had led to systemic problems of inappropriate conditions of detention in SIZOs, requiring complex decisions and adequate funding.
The 2017 Concept proposed the following ways of solving the abovementioned problems: enhancing the legislation on the functioning of SIZOs and prisons in accordance with European standards; optimising the SSES structure and the network of penal establishments; repairing existing facilities and constructing new SIZOs and prisons; bringing conditions of detention in line with the European Prisons Rules and creating conditions which respect human dignity and do not lead to breaches of the Convention; creating an effective system for combating inhuman or degrading treatment and conditions for its prevention; implementing the recommendations of international organisations on strengthening guarantees for protection of the rights of detained and convicted persons; improving the organisational and staffing structure of SIZOs and prisons; and introducing the use of modern information technologies in them.
The Government submitted that owing to financial constraints, implementation of the 2017 Concept was estimated to take until 2020.
On 8 July 2016 a draft law on preventive and compensatory remedies for convicted and detained persons who have suffered torture, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment and on the introduction of the institution of post-sentencing judges (“the 2016 draft law”) was submitted to Parliament. It provides for preventive and compensatory remedies in respect of inappropriate treatment of convicted and detained persons, and sets out the types of remedy and the procedure for their application and for the execution of relevant decisions. Preventive remedies are defined as actions aimed at ending or preventing prohibited treatment. They include, inter alia, an obligation on the part of the relevant officials to change the detention facility or cell in which a detained or convicted person is being held; to make repairs to the cell, to equip or disinfect it, or to stop using it; to provide adequate food, and so on. Compensatory remedies are defined as actions aimed at compensating victims of prohibited treatment. They include monetary compensation for pecuniary and non-pecuniary damage inflicted on such victims. The draft law also introduces the institution of post-sentencing judge, who deals with applications for preventive and compensatory remedies and for the adoption of binding decisions in this respect. Thus, applications for preventive remedies should be examined within three working days, but in certain circumstances within a period of up to one month. The judge is obliged to visit in person the relevant detention facility and to conduct an anonymous interview with a detainee who made an application. Upon the latter’s wish, participation of a defender is ensured during the interview. Decisions on the application of preventive measures should immediately be complied with by the relevant authorities or persons. Failure to comply with them entails disciplinary or criminal liability.
The Government submitted that the draft law was being examined by the relevant parliamentary committees. According to the information available on the Parliament’s , on 29 August 2019 that draft law was withdrawn.
According to the NPM , the following numbers of detainees were held in SIZOs between 2009 and 2017: 34,148 in 2009; 38,030 in 2010; 39,363 in 2011; 37,632 in 2012; 30,854 in 2013; 21,502 in 2014; 15,638 in 2015; and 16,615 in 2016.
According to the Government, as of 22 October 2017, there were 19,516 persons being held in SIZOs and penal institutions with SIZO functions.
According to the information on the SSES , as of 1 April 2019, 20,346 persons were being held in SIZOs.
According to information on the  of the Prosecutor General’s Office of Ukraine, the following number of applications for a detention order were lodged by prosecutors and other law-enforcement officers and were rejected by the courts between 2012 and 2018: in 2012  27,746 applications lodged and 3,178 (11%) rejected; in 2013  17,373 applications lodged and 1,882 (10%) rejected; in 2014  18,149 applications lodged and 2,099 (11.5%) rejected; in 2015  23,969 applications lodged and 2,294 (9.5%) rejected; in 2016  17,593 applications lodged and 3,163 (18%) rejected; in 2017  22,473 applications lodged and 4,556 (20%) rejected; and in 2018  21,501 applications lodged and 4,875 (22.6%) rejected.