The case originated in an application (no. 47146/11) against the Republic of Turkey lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by two British nationals, Ms S.T. and Mr K.A. (“the applicants”), on 11 May 2011.
The applicants were represented by Mr A. Yılmaz and Mrs S. Yılmaz, lawyers practising in Istanbul. The Turkish Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent.
On 11 May 2011 the applicants’ representatives sent the application form to the Court by fax. The next day, they posted it together with supporting documents and an authority form completed by the first applicant. On 20 May 2011 the Court received the original of the application form, the accompanying documents and a letter signed by one of the applicants’ representatives, Mr Yılmaz, in which he stated that the second applicant was a minor and that he would send a power of attorney signed by his legal guardian as soon as possible.
On 17 April and 2 July 2012 the Court sent two letters to one of the applicants’ representatives asking him to send a completed authority form with regard to the second applicant and warning him that failure to do so could lead the Court to declare the application inadmissible.
On 4 April 2013 the application was communicated to the Government.
Having been informed on 4 April 2013 that they could submit written observations under Article 36 § 1 of the Convention and Rule 44 of the Rules of Court, the United Kingdom Government indicated on 29 May 2013 that they did not intend to exercise their right in that regard.
On 17 December 2013 a completed authority form signed by the second applicant’s mother and dated 30 November 2013 was sent to the Court.
The applicants were born in 1966 and 1996 respectively and live in Sheffield, the United Kingdom.
On 8 November 2010 the applicants arrived in Turkey from Iran. They were planning to fly to Manchester (the United Kingdom) from Istanbul Atatürk Airport on the next day.
At around 11 a.m. on 9 November 2010 the applicants were about to board the plane for Manchester, but were prevented from doing so by officers from the private airport security company. It was alleged that the second applicant’s passport photograph did not resemble him and could belong to someone else. Both applicants were taken to the “problematic passenger room” at the office of the passport police for an examination of the second applicant’s passport.
At 4 p.m. on the same day the applicants signed documents entitled “Report of apprehension and custody/rights of suspects and accused persons”, which set out their rights within the context of their arrest. According to the report which the first applicant signed, she had been apprehended on account of “being an accomplice to false identity”. The reports stated that a public prosecutor had been informed of the apprehension. However, the prosecutor did not order that the applicants be taken into police custody. The reports signed by the applicants do not bear the signature of an interpreter.
According to a report drafted by two police officers at 4 p.m. the same day, the police asked one of the public prosecutors at the Bakırköy public prosecutor’s office for instructions on how to proceed. The public prosecutor ordered that the photographs, fingerprints and statements of the first applicant, S.T., be taken; that the second applicant, K.A., be transferred to the Bakırköy police station juvenile department and that the passport in question be seized for an examination of its authenticity.
The second applicant was kept at the office of the passport police at Atatürk Airport until 10.50 p.m. on 9 November 2010. He was then transferred to the Bakırköy police station juvenile department following the instructions of the public prosecutor, before being sent to the police criminal laboratory in order to establish his identity.
On 10 November 2010 the Bakırköy Magistrates’ Court decided to confiscate the second applicant’s passport.
On the same day the second applicant was taken to the Bakırköy public prosecutor’s office. His statements were taken by the public prosecutor, who decided to impose an administrative sanction under the Misdemeanors Act and to release him.
Later on the same day the police criminal laboratory issued a report establishing the authenticity of the second applicant’s passport.
Subsequently, the police received instructions from one of the prosecutors from the Bakırköy public prosecutor’s office to either hand the second applicant over to a family member or transfer him to social services.
At around 4 p.m. on 11 November 2010 the second applicant was handed over to one of his relatives, Mr. B.M., who was also the first applicant’s husband. At the same time his passport was given back to him as its authenticity had been proved.
Meanwhile, following the arrest of the first applicant at the airport on 9 November 2010, her photograph and fingerprints were taken. At 9 p.m. on the same day she was questioned by two police officers at Istanbul Atatürk Airport with the help of another police officer, who acted as an interpreter. The first applicant was informed that she had been brought to the office of the passport police on suspicion that she had helped the second applicant to travel abroad with a passport which had not belonged to him. In her statements, the applicant maintained that the second applicant was a relative of her husband and that his mother was a British citizen. She denied the veracity of the allegations against her.
The first applicant continued to be detained at the airport detention facility until 12 November 2010.
At 4 p.m. on 12 November 2010 the first applicant was transferred from the airport detention facility to the Kumkapı Foreigners’ Removal Centre.
At 9.20 p.m. on 13 November 2010 the first applicant was deported to the United Kingdom.
On 12 November 2010 the applicants’ lawyer lodged a criminal complaint with the Bakırköy public prosecutor’s office against D.Ö., N.G. and Y.A., officers on duty at the time of the applicants’ detention at Istanbul Atatürk Airport. He requested that an investigation be initiated against the aforementioned officers who had abused their power and unlawfully deprived his client of her liberty. The lawyer submitted that the authenticity of the second applicant’s passport had been established and that the first applicant had been detained at the airport without a legal basis. He stressed that if his client had been suspected of having committed an offence, the police should have kept her for only twenty-four hours. He requested that his client be brought before a public prosecutor or be released. In his petition, the lawyer also complained of overcrowding and the material conditions of the airport detention room where his client had been held.
On 20 January 2011 the Bakırköy public prosecutor took statements from two police officers who had been on duty at the time of the first applicant’s detention. Both officers maintained that the first applicant had been kept in detention pending her transfer to the Kumkapı Foreigners’ Removal Centre attached to the Istanbul security directorate.
On 22 January 2011 the Bakırköy public prosecutor decided not to bring criminal proceedings against those police officers. In his decision, the public prosecutor noted that the first applicant had been subject to a criminal investigation following the instructions of the public prosecutor on duty and that she had been held at the foreigners’ detention centre (misafirhane - guesthouse) at the airport. The public prosecutor considered that the delay in the first applicant’s release had occurred on account of the administrative procedure regarding her deportation and that the police officers had not acted with the intention of committing the offence of abuse of power.
On 23 February 2011 the applicants’ lawyer objected to the decision of 22 January 2011. In his petition he brought to the attention of the Assize Court the issues of the alleged unlawfulness of the first applicant’s detention, the absence of information given to the first applicant about her arrest, the unlawfulness of her deportation without being notified by a deportation order and the alleged poor conditions of detention.
On 14 March 2011 the Istanbul Assize Court dismissed the first applicant’s objection, holding that the decision of 22 January 2011 had been in accordance with the law.
In the meantime, following the criminal complaint lodged by the first applicant, a disciplinary inquiry was initiated into D.Ö., N.G. and Y.A. by the Istanbul security directorate. On 16 February 2011 the Istanbul security directorate decided not to bring disciplinary proceedings against the officers in view of the Bakırköy public prosecutor’s decision of 22 January 2011. In the decision, it was noted that the applicants had been subject to misdemeanour proceedings and that the first applicant had not been in police custody but had been held in the foreigners’ detention centre (misafirhane - guesthouse) at the airport.
On 28 February 2011 the applicants’ lawyer objected to the decision of 16 February 2011. In his petition, he submitted the same arguments as those he had submitted to the Istanbul Assize Court on 23 February 2011.
On 2 June 2011 the Istanbul Regional Administrative Court held that it did not have jurisdiction to render a judgment on the merits of the first applicant’s objection, given that the decision of 16 February 2011 had not refused authorisation to bring criminal proceedings against the police officers. The court noted that in order to annul the administrative decision in question, the applicant should have lodged an action with the administrative courts.
The first applicant claimed that the detention room at Istanbul Atatürk Airport had been overcrowded at the time of her detention, which had lasted seventy-seven hours. She submitted that she had been kept in a room measuring approximately 32 sq. m, which had been divided into two sections by a partition. One of the sections had a window but the other one received no natural light. The applicant claimed that she had been kept in the latter section with at least twenty other people at a time. There was no fresh air and the overcrowding of the room led to problems of hygiene. The applicant also claimed that there had been no furniture in the room suitable for sleeping on, and that in any case it had been impossible to lie down due to the overcrowding. She also claimed that she had had no access to fresh air throughout her detention at the airport and that she had been unable to go to the toilets unless she had been accompanied by officers.
The Government maintained that the applicant had been detained in a waiting room located in the legal services department of the airport security directorate. The room in question measured 32 sq. m. It received direct sunlight through windows and had a ventilation system. They noted that the room had a padded sitting area for rest and sleep, and was cleaned every day. The Government contended that detainees used the toilet of the security directorate. According to the Government’s submissions, in total eighty-seven persons were detained in that room between 9 and 12 November 2010.
The Government submitted a black-and-white photograph of the room where the first applicant had been detained. The photograph shows two separate areas divided by a partition. The area on the right side of the photograph has two windows, two divans and three chairs. This part of the room appears to be well lit. The left side of the photograph shows a dark area without a window in which there are seven chairs and a divan. Both areas appear to be clean.
The Government further submitted two lists to the Court containing the names of the detainees kept in police custody at the Istanbul Atatürk airport detention facility on 9 and 12 November 2010, the reasons for their detention, the nationality of the detainees, and the date and time of their arrest. According to those lists, at 7 p.m. on 9 November 2010 a total of thirty-eight persons were detained at Istanbul Atatürk Airport (thirty-one men and seven women), whereas at 8 a.m. on 12 November 2010, there were forty-nine detainees in custody (thirty-seven men and twelve women). The first applicant’s name appears on the list of 9 November 2010 but not on the list dated 12 November 2010.
A description of relevant domestic law and practice regarding the detention and deportation of foreign nationals at the material time can be found in the cases of Yarashonen v. Turkey (no. 72710/11, §§ 21-26, 24 June 2014) and Abdolkhani and Karimnia v. Turkey (no. 30471/08, §§ 29-45, 22 September 2009).
Paragraph 1 of Article 141 of the Code of Criminal Procedure provides as follows:
“Persons; ...
b) who were not brought before a judge within the period prescribed by law,
...
g) who were not provided with the reasons for their arrest and the charges in a written form or, in the event that written notification was not imminently possible, orally;
...
during the criminal investigation or prosecution may demand compensation for all pecuniary and non-pecuniary damage they sustained from the State.”
The standards of the European Committee for the Prevention of Torture and Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment (“the CPT”) for the conditions of detention of foreign nationals (see the CPT standards, document no. CPT/Inf/E (2002) 1- Rev. 2013) provide, in so far as relevant, as follows:
“25.  CPT visiting delegations have met immigration detainees in a variety of custodial settings, ranging from holding facilities at points of entry to police stations, prisons and specialised detention centres. As regards more particularly transit and ‘international’ zones at airports ... the CPT has always maintained that a stay in a transit or ‘international’ zone can, depending on the circumstances, amount to a deprivation of liberty within the meaning of Article 5 (1)(f) of the European Convention on Human Rights, and that consequently such zones fall within the Committee’s mandate
...
Point of entry holding facilities have often been found to be inadequate, in particular for extended stays. More specifically, CPT delegations have on several occasions met persons held for days under makeshift conditions in airport lounges. It is axiomatic that such persons should be provided with suitable means for sleeping, granted access to their luggage and to suitably-equipped sanitary and washing facilities, and allowed to exercise in the open air on a daily basis. Further, access to food and, if necessary, medical care should be guaranteed.
...
Conditions of detention for irregular migrants should reflect the nature of their deprivation of liberty, with limited restrictions in place and a varied regime of activities. For example, detained irregular migrants ... should be restricted in their freedom of movement within the detention facility as little as possible.”
In June 2009 the CPT visited a number of detention facilities, in different provinces in Turkey, where foreign nationals were held, including the holding facilities for foreign nationals in the transit zone of Istanbul Atatürk Airport, where the first applicant was also detained. The relevant extracts from their visit report dated 16 December 2009 read as follows:
“3.  Holding facilities for foreign nationals in the transit zone of Istanbul International Airport
The holding facilities of the Passport Police in the transit area of Istanbul International Airport comprised two rooms for persons who, upon arrival by airplane, are being denied entry into the territory of Turkey. The premises were managed by a private security company under the supervision of the Passport Police.
On the day of the visit, there were 13 foreign nationals present (seven women and six men). According to the custody book, more than 3,400 foreign nationals had been held in these facilities since the beginning of 2009. The vast majority of them stayed there only for very short periods, pending their departure on the next possible flight. Only in exceptional cases were persons held there for more than 24 hours.
Material conditions were generally adequate for short periods of stay. The two detention rooms (one for male and one for female foreign nationals) were equipped with armchairs (which could be converted into beds), tables and chairs. Showers and sanitary facilities were also available.”
The United Nations (“UN”) Special Rapporteur on the human rights of migrants, Mr François Crépeau, conducted an official visit to Turkey on 25-29 June 2012 at the invitation of the Turkish Government. He visited, inter alia, the holding facilities for foreign nationals in the transit zone of Istanbul Atatürk Airport, and submitted a report to the UN General Assembly on 17 April 2013 (A/HRC/23/46/Add.2). The relevant parts of the report read as follows:
“58.  The Special Rapporteur also visited the “problematic passenger room” in the transit zone at Istanbul Atatürk Airport. This is an important border crossing point, where migrants may be arrested and detained, both those who are trying to enter Turkey, and those who are in transit. The fact that Turkish authorities claim that the “problematic passenger room” is under the authority of a private company, and not within the jurisdiction of Turkish authorities, is of great concern to the Special Rapporteur: this “problematic passenger room”, despite its name, is a place of detention, as the persons held there are not free to leave. Moreover, the transit zone is Turkish territory for which Turkish authorities are responsible. The difficulties the Special Rapporteur had getting access to the “problematic passenger room”, with the Government claiming that they did not have jurisdiction, reflects what the Special Rapporteur heard from lawyers, civil society and international organizations concerning their limited access to this place. The Special Rapporteur is further alarmed at reports of persons being detained there for lengthy periods of time. He is troubled that the Turkish authorities do not appear to be monitoring effectively how migrants are treated in the transit zone, and encourages them to do so systematically.”