The case originated in an application (no. 72710/11) against the Republic of Turkey lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Russian national of Chechen origin, Mr Zalim Yarashonen (“the applicant”), on 28 October 2011.
The applicant was represented by Ms S. N. Yılmaz and Mr A. Yılmaz, lawyers practising in Istanbul. The Turkish Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent.
On 18 March 2013 the application was communicated to the Government.
The applicant and the Government each filed observations on the admissibility and merits of the application. The Russian Government, who had been informed of their right to intervene under Article 36 of the Convention, did not make use of this right.
The applicant was born in 1984 and lives in Istanbul.
On an unspecified date in 2000 the applicant fled Russia and travelled to Turkey following the alleged killing of his father and brother by Russian security forces.
On 25 October 2010 he was arrested at Atatürk International Airport in Istanbul, following an identity check, on the ground that he had entered Turkey illegally and possessed no passport. He was placed in custody at the police station in the airport.
On 26 October 2010 the applicant was questioned by a police officer at Atatürk International Airport police station. He stated that he had entered Turkey in 2000 through the Sarp border crossing on the Georgian border using his birth certificate and that he had never possessed a passport.
On 1 November 2010 the applicant was transferred to the Kumkapı Removal Centre.
On 17 February 2011 the applicant met with his lawyer, Mr A. Yılmaz, who also represented him during the proceedings before the Court. There is no information in the case file regarding the scope of their meeting, nor is it clear whether this was the applicant’s first meeting with his lawyer.
On 13 April 2011 the applicant met with another lawyer, Mr F. Amca. The lawyer indicated in his meeting notes that the applicant had not yet filed an asylum request at that point. He further noted that the applicant had caught flu three to four months before, but had not sought any treatment and was still suffering from it. It appears from the lawyer’s notes that at the end of the meeting the lawyer advised the applicant to speak to the officers in charge at the removal centre about his asylum request and his health problems.
On 18 April 2011 the applicant applied for asylum.
On 21 April 2011 the applicant’s lawyer, Mr A. Yılmaz, sent a letter to the General Security Directorate of the Ministry of the Interior by standard post complaining that the applicant was being detained unlawfully and requesting his release. In the letter he also brought the applicant’s health issues to the authorities’ attention and requested medical assistance. According to the information provided by the parties, the letter reached the Ministry of the Interior on 2 May 2011.
In the meantime, on 29 April 2011, the applicant was released from detention and granted an asylum-seeker certificate. He was instructed to reside in the Sakarya province pending the determination of his asylum request.
On 30 April 2011 the applicant went to a private clinic in Istanbul complaining of a cough and fatigue. He was diagnosed with an infection of the lower respiratory tract on the basis of a chest X-ray examination. He was prescribed a ten-day course of antibiotics and was asked to return to the clinic for a check-up at the end of that period. It is not clear whether the applicant did return to the clinic for his check-up.
On 9 June 2011, as his symptoms persisted, the applicant went to the Süreyyapaşa Thoracic and Cardiovascular Surgery Training and Research Hospital in Istanbul. Further medical tests conducted at the hospital revealed that the applicant was suffering from tuberculosis pleurisy. He received in-patient treatment at the hospital until 15 June 2011. On being discharged, he was advised to apply to a tuberculosis clinic for follow-up treatment. The applicant has not provided any information regarding his state of health or the treatment he received following his discharge.
The applicant claimed that the Kumkapı Removal Centre was severely overcrowded at the time of his detention, which lasted five months and twenty-seven days. He had to share a dormitory room of approximately 40 sq. m with twenty-four to forty-five other people, who were provided with only fifteen bunk-beds. The centre had an overall capacity of 560 people at the relevant time, but accommodated around 600 people. The overcrowding of the centre led to problems of hygiene. The building was infested with insects and there were frequent outbreaks of contagious diseases; he had thus contracted a serious bacterial infection. The quality and quantity of the food provided was also fairly poor. Moreover, there was no provision for outdoor exercise at the Kumkapı Removal Centre, which meant that he had been unable to go outside throughout his detention.
The Government submitted that the Kumkapı Removal Centre where the applicant was detained had a capacity of 300 persons. The detainees were accommodated on three floors: the first two floors were reserved for male detainees, and the third floor for females. There were five dormitory rooms on each floor, measuring 50, 58, 69, 76 and 84 sq. m respectively. There were fifteen to twenty beds in each of the ten rooms reserved for male detainees and all rooms were sufficiently ventilated. There were also five showers and six toilets per floor, as well as a cafeteria measuring 69 sq. m, where breakfast, lunch and dinner were served daily on each floor. The detainees had the right to outdoor exercise in suitable weather conditions. A doctor was present on the premises every Thursday and the detainees also had access to medical care in cases of emergency. As for the hygiene in the facility, there were six cleaning staff working full time at the removal centre, and the building was disinfected whenever necessary.
In support of their claims, the Government submitted, inter alia, photos of two of the dormitory rooms, both of which appeared well lit and fairly clean, as well as of the hallway and the cafeteria on one of the floors reserved for male detainees. Although the total number of beds cannot be ascertained from the photos, it is observed that there were two rows of bunk beds positioned against the walls in both rooms, leaving a narrow corridor in the middle of the room. While some of the bunks were touching each other, others were separated by big metal lockers. No other furniture, such as tables and chairs, was present in the rooms; there were blankets on the beds in only one of the rooms and the other room had no bedding at all. A television was available on each floor in the cafeteria. Moreover, a metal situp bench and an exercise bike were shown on the photo of the hallway of one of the floors reserved for male detainees. No photos of the toilets or the showers were provided.
The Government further stated that when the applicant first arrived in the Kumkapı Removal Centre on 1 November 2010, there were 265 detainees in total (163 male and 102 female). They also claimed that from 1 November 2010 until the applicant’s release on 29 April 2011, the number of detainees never exceeded 300 and submitted the registers showing the occupation rates in respect of male detainees on various dates as follows:
The relevant provisions of the Turkish Constitution provide as follows:
“Everyone has the right to a fair trial ..., as a claimant or defendant, before courts of law ...”
“All actions or decision taken by the authorities are amenable to judicial review ...
If the implementation of an administrative measure would result in damage which is difficult or impossible to compensate and the measure is also clearly unlawful, a stay of execution may be granted, stating reasons ...”
The administration shall be liable to make compensation for damage resulting from its actions or decisions.”
Section 2(1) (b) of the Administrative Procedure Act (Law no. 2577) provides that administrative proceedings can be brought on account of a violation of personal rights by an administrative action or measure.
A description of the other relevant domestic law and practice at the material time can be found in the case of Abdolkhani and Karimnia v. Turkey (no. 30471/08, §§ 29-45, 22 September 2009).
At its meeting of 8 December 2011 the Human Rights Inquiry Committee of the Grand National Assembly of Turkey established a sub-committee to look into the problems encountered by refugees, asylum seekers and irregular migrants in Turkey, including the conditions in which they were detained pending their deportation. For that purpose, on 10 and 11 May 2012 two Members of Parliament (“MPs”) visited the removal centres in Edirne, Kırklareli and Istanbul, including the Kumkapı Removal Centre.
The visit report indicated that the Kumkapı Removal Centre had a total capacity of 300 detainees (200 male and 100 female). However, at the time of the delegation’s visit (11 May 2012), the removal centre accommodated 297 male, 97 female and 7 minor detainees. The number of beds varied according to the rooms and the hygiene in the toilets and bathrooms was unsatisfactory. There was a big cafeteria in the removal centre, with sufficient amenities, as well as the possibility to purchase food and basic provisions. The detainees had freedom of movement inside the centre and also had access to television in the cafeterias. They also benefited from the sports equipment provided in the corridors.
The delegation was particularly critical of the fact that the detainees were authorised to go outdoors only once a week, when the weather conditions permitted. It recommended measures allowing the detainees daily outdoor exercise at their own convenience.
The standards of the European Committee for the Prevention of Torture and Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment concerning the conditions of detention of foreign nationals (see the CPT standards, document no. CPT/Inf/E (2002) 1- Rev. 2013) provide, in so far as relevant, as follows:
“29.  In the view of the CPT, in those cases where it is deemed necessary to deprive persons of their liberty for an extended period under aliens legislation, they should be accommodated in centres specifically designed for that purpose, offering material conditions and a regime appropriate to their legal situation and staffed by suitably-qualified personnel.
Obviously, such centres should provide accommodation which is adequately-furnished, clean and in a good state of repair, and which offers sufficient living space for the numbers involved. Further, care should be taken in the design and layout of the premises to avoid as far as possible any impression of a carceral environment. As regards regime activities, they should include outdoor exercise, access to a day room and to radio/television and newspapers/magazines, as well as other appropriate means of recreation (e.g. board games, table tennis). The longer the period for which persons are detained, the more developed should be the activities which are offered to them.
...
Conditions of detention for irregular migrants should reflect the nature of their deprivation of liberty, with limited restrictions in place and a varied regime of activities. For example, detained irregular migrants ... should be restricted in their freedom of movement within the detention facility as little as possible.”
The same report also indicates, on pages 25 and 26, that material conditions of detention may in certain cases be such as to favour the spread of transmissible diseases and that States have a duty of care towards persons deprived of their liberty to prevent this problem by, inter alia, ensuring satisfactory hygiene and absence of overcrowding in places of detention, as well as access to natural light and good ventilation.
In June 2009 the CPT visited six removal centres for foreigners in different provinces in Turkey, including the Kumkapı Removal Centre in Istanbul (referred to as the “Istanbul-Kumkapı Detention Centre”) where the applicant was also detained. The relevant extracts from its visit report dated 16 December 2009 read as follows:
“Istanbul-Kumkapı Detention Centre, which was opened in March 2007, is the largest detention facility for immigration detainees in Turkey, with an official capacity of 560 places (for 360 male and 200 female detainees). At the time of the visit, the centre was accommodating 124 foreign nationals.
...
As regards material conditions in the detention centres visited, the delegation noted a sharp reduction in the number of detained persons during the two preceding weeks in several establishments visited (in particular at Istanbul-Kumkapı and Edirne-Tunça), where apparently up to 50% of all detainees had been released. This had obviously had a beneficial effect on the living conditions prevailing in the establishments at the time of the visit.
...
At Istanbul-Kumkapı, material conditions in the new detention facility were generally much better than those found in the past in the former detention facilities in Istanbul [footnote: Though some improvements were made only very shortly before the visit (e.g. painting of walls, contracting of external cleaning staff, etc.)]. In particular, most detention rooms were spacious, well lit (with good access to natural light) and very clean.
That said, it is clear that the centre’s current official capacity of 560 places is far too high, given the space and facilities available. In particular, the living space in the detention rooms is insufficient (e.g. 58 m² for 30 beds), and communal rooms are inadequate in terms of size and equipment (e.g. on the ground floor with a total of 120 beds, the communal room was equipped with eight tables and 23 chairs). The CPT recommends that steps be taken to significantly reduce the official capacity of Istanbul-Kumkapı Detention Centre and to ensure that future occupancy levels are always kept within the limits of the new capacity.
...
It is of particular concern that, with the exception of Kırklareli and, as regards women and children, Istanbul-Kumkapı [footnote: At Kumkapı, the existing courtyard was primarily used as a parking area for police vehicles. Due to the limited space available, only female detainees and children benefited from daily outdoor exercise, whereas male adult detainees were usually denied outdoor exercise for weeks and months on end], foreign nationals held in the detention centres visited were offered no outdoor exercise at all. Such a state of affairs is unacceptable.
During the end-of-visit talks, the delegation made an immediate observation and called upon the Turkish authorities to take the necessary measures to ensure that all immigration detainees at the detention centres in Ağrı, Edirne-Tunça, Istanbul-Kumkapı, Konya and Van are able to benefit from at least one hour of outdoor exercise per day.
By letter of 23 September 2009, the Turkish authorities informed the Committee that foreign nationals held at Istanbul-Kumkapı Detention Centre “are allowed to open air for an average of one hour per day and benefit from outdoor activities”...
The CPT welcomes the steps taken thus far and would like to receive confirmation that all foreign nationals held at Ağrı and Istanbul-Kumkapı Detention Centres are able to benefit from at least one hour of outdoor exercise per day.
...
In several detention centres visited, many complaints were received about the quality and/or quantity of the food provided. The director of one of the centres visited affirmed to the delegation that, in his experience, the budgetary allocation of 4.60 TLR per person and day was clearly insufficient. The CPT recommends that the provision of food to immigration detainees be reviewed in all the detention centres for foreigners, to ensure that it is adequate in terms of both quantity and quality.”
On 11 June 2010 the Turkish Government responded to the aforementioned CPT report. Below are extracts from the relevant parts of the Government’s response:
“According to Article B/4 of the Circular on the fight against illegal migrants (No. 632 dated 19 March 2010), a Directive will be prepared by the Directorate General of Security to be disseminated to Governorships, on the physical condition requirements of the return centers and basic management elements of these centers.
This Directive will cover the issues such as establishment and administration of return centers, arrangement of in kind and monetary assistance allocated by the NGOs, relations with these organizations, registries on illegal migrants accommodated in these centers (compulsory registry books and modalities of safekeeping precious belongings as well as other belongings of illegal migrants that cannot be used at return centers) and modalities of transferring illegal migrants from provinces where holding capacity has been surpassed to other provinces with available places.
...
Article B/5 of the Circular on the fight against illegal migration states that ‘the necessary conditions of the return centers where illegal migrants are accommodated until their deportation and the basic elements of implementation in these centers are enclosed and procedures shall be conducted according to these elements until the Directive issued by the Directorate General of Security enters into force.’
According to Article 19 of the “Basic Elements” Section of the Circular, the following procedures shall be conducted regarding the centers;
...
Necessary measures shall be taken for adequate access to natural light.
Outdoor exercise on a daily basis shall be offered to persons held for 24 hours or more.
Necessary measures shall be taken in order to provide longer hours and a greater variety of activities to the illegal migrants accommodated in the centre.
Television sets shall be provided for the use of illegal migrants.
...
According to Articles 9, 10, 11, 12 and the “Basic Elements” Section of the Circular on the fight against illegal migration;
-Hot water shall be provided throughout the day.
-Sufficient number of toilets shall be constructed both in men’s and women’s sections.
-Sufficient number of washing machines shall be provided. Sheets and blankets utilized by illegal migrants shall be regularly washed to meet hygiene conditions.
-Mineral water shall be provided on a daily basis to illegal migrants, where tap water is not potable.
-The services provided to illegal migrants (such as food and cleaning) shall be realized by outsourcing, in principle.
...”
The United Nations (“UN”) Special Rapporteur on the human rights of migrants, Mr François Crépeau, undertook an official visit to Turkey on 2529 June 2012 at the invitation of the Turkish Government. He visited, inter alia, the removal centres in Kumkapı and Edirne, and submitted a report to the UN General Assembly on 17 April 2013 (A/HRC/23/46/Add.2). The relevant parts of the report read as follows:
“42.  During his visit, the Special Rapporteur noted an insufficient regulation of the reasons for administrative detention of migrants, its duration, detention conditions and the access to safeguards for the detained migrants.
...
While a circular issued by the Turkish National Police in September 2010 gave the instruction to systematically inform irregular migrants held in removal centres in writing of the reason for being held in the centre, the duration of stay, their right to have access to a lawyer, and the right of appeal against the decision to be held in a removal centre or deportation order, the Special Rapporteur’s interviews with detained migrants at Edirne and Kumkapı removal centres indicate that this circular is not systematically implemented in practice.
...
The Special Rapporteur also remains disturbed about the conditions in these removal centres: detainees, including children, are often locked in their rooms or wards, and are given little or no access to outdoor areas. Overcrowding and unclean conditions, including inadequate food, are also significant concerns.”
The European Commission’s 2011 Progress Report on Turkey published on 12 October 2011 (SEC (2011) 1201) made the following observations regarding the absence of detailed provisions on the management of removal centres in Turkey (page 91):
“4.24 ... There is no comprehensive set of rules/guidelines for the management and operation of removal centres. The TNP [Turkish National Police] has been tasked with drafting a ‘directive’ to regulate issues concerning the management of removal centres, including the physical conditions in centres, staff to be appointed, the security of and in the centres, provision of food and health, treatment of vulnerable groups, as well as involvement of civil society in the centres. This ‘directive’ has not yet been adopted.”
The Progress Report of 2012 (published on 10 October 2012, SWD 2012 (336) page 75) similarly noted that “minimum living standards at removal centres and their inspection remain unregulated”.
Lastly, in its report “Stranded: Refugees in Turkey Denied Protection” released in 2009, Amnesty International expressed its concerns regarding the arbitrary detention of asylum seekers and refugees in Turkey in the following terms:
“Amnesty International is concerned that many of the violations of the rights of refugees and asylum-seekers in detention stem from the lack of legal protection in national law for persons in administrative detention. Asylum-seekers and refugees held in administrative detention in foreigners’ guest-houses are regarded as under administrative supervision (idari gözetim) rather than detention. In practice this results in asylum-seekers and refugees being unfairly denied the legal protections applicable to all persons in detention provided under international law. Irrespective of national law categorizations, individuals hold rights under international law as highlighted above, including the right to be free from arbitrary detention and protections if detained.”