The case originated in an application (no. 37006/02) against the  lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Slovenian national, Mrs Dora Pavlovič (“the applicant”), on 25 September 2002.
The applicant was represented by Mr B. Verstovšek, a lawyer practising in Celje. The Slovenian Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Mr L. Bembič, State Attorney-General.
The applicant alleged under Article 6 § 1 of the Convention that the length of the proceedings before the domestic courts to which she was a party was excessive. In substance, she also complained about the lack of an effective domestic remedy in respect of the excessive length of the proceedings (Article 13 of the Convention).
On 9 June 2006 the Court decided to communicate the complaints concerning the length of the proceedings and the lack of remedies in that respect to the Government. Applying Article 29 § 3 of the Convention, it decided to examine the merits of the application at the same time as its admissibility.
The applicant was born in 1956 and lives in Celje.
On 2 July 1995 the applicant was injured in a car accident. She had taken out insurance with the insurance company ZT.
The applicant and ZT agreed on the appointment of a medical expert to assess the extent of the applicant's injuries. The appointed medical expert established that the applicant had sustained 45 per cent permanent invalidity as a result of the accident. ZT paid the applicant damages corresponding to 35 per cent of the invalidity level.
On 13 October 1998 the applicant instituted civil proceedings against ZT in the Celje Local Court (Okrajno sodišče v Celju) seeking payment of damages corresponding to the unpaid 10 per cent of the invalidity level in the amount of 677,040 Slovenian tolars (approximately 2,800 euros).
Between 20 October 1999 and 30 August 2002 the applicant lodged four preliminary written submissions.
On 20 October 1999 she also made a request that a date be set for a hearing.
Three hearings were held between 4 June 2001 and 18 September 2002.
During the proceedings the court appointed a medical expert. The court also sought an additional opinion from the appointed expert.
At the last-mentioned hearing the court decided to deliver a written judgment. The judgment, upholding the applicant's claim, was served on the applicant on 30 December 2002.
On an unspecified date ZT appealed to the  (Višje sodišče v Celju).
On 18 March 2004 the court dismissed ZT's appeal and upheld the first-instance judgment. The judgment was served on the applicant on 28 April 2004.
The Act on the Protection of the Right to a Trial without undue Delay (Zakon o varstvu pravice do sojenja brez nepotrebnega odlašanja, Official Journal, No. 49/2006) has been implemented since 1 January 2007. Under its sections 1 and 2, the right to a trial within a reasonable time is guaranteed for a party to court proceedings, a participant under the Act governing non-contentious proceedings and an injured party in criminal proceedings.
Section 25 - Just satisfaction for damage sustained prior to implementation of this Act
“(1) In cases where a violation of the right to a trial without undue delay has already ceased and the party had filed a claim for just satisfaction with the international court before the date of implementation of this Act, the State Attorney's Office shall offer the party a settlement on the amount of just satisfaction within four months after the date of receipt of the case referred by the international court for the settlement procedure. The party shall submit a settlement proposal to the State Attorney's Office within two months of the date of receipt of the proposal of the State Attorney's Office. The State Attorney's Office shall decide on the proposal as soon as possible and within a period of four months at the latest. ...
(2) If the proposal for settlement referred to in paragraph 1 of this section is not acceded to or the State Attorney's Office and the party fail to negotiate an agreement within four months after the date on which the party filed its proposal, the party may bring an action before the competent court under this Act. The party may bring an action within six months after receiving the State Attorney's Office reply that the party's proposal referred to in the previous paragraph was not acceded to, or after the expiry of the period fixed in the previous paragraph for the State Attorney's Office to decide to proceed with settlement. Irrespective of the type or amount of the claim, the provisions of the Civil Procedure Act concerning small claims shall apply in proceedings before a court.”