The case originated in an application (no. 22373/04) against the  lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Bulgarian national, Mr Rumen Alekov Hadzhiev (“the applicant”), on 14 June 2004.
The applicant was represented by Mr M. Ekimdzhiev and Mr A. Kashamov, lawyers practising respectively in Plovdiv and . The Bulgarian Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Ms M. Dimova, of the Ministry of Justice.
The applicant alleged, in particular, that he had been subjected to secret surveillance and that he had not had effective remedies in that respect.
On 10 December 2008 the Court (Fifth Section) decided to give the Government notice of the complaints concerning the alleged interference with the applicant’s right to respect for his private life and correspondence and the alleged lack of effective remedies in that respect. It was also decided to rule on the admissibility and merits of the application at the same time (Article 29 § 1 of the Convention).
Following the recomposition of the Court’s sections on 1 February 2011, the application was transferred to the Fourth Section.
The applicant was born in 1948 and lives in .
On 21 June 2001 the applicant requested the president of the  to inform him in writing whether that court had issued warrants authorising interception of his communications. Later on he specified that his request did not relate to current interception; he merely wished to know whether any such warrants had been issued for past periods. He explained that he needed that information to be able to decide whether or not to bring a tort claim against the authorities.
On 23 October 2001 the president of the  instructed the applicant to specify the exact period in respect of which he sought information, and referred him to the Minister of Internal Affairs.
On 25 October 2001 the applicant wrote to the Minister, but did not receive a reply.
He then applied again to the president of the , reiterating his request for information and specifying that it related to the period between 1 January 1996 and 1 November 2001. The president of the court wrote on the request “There has been an answer.”
The applicant sought judicial review of what he saw as a tacit refusal to provide him the requested information. On 21 July 2003 the , to which the case had been transferred, dismissed the applicant’s legal challenge, finding that the information sought by him was classified.
On an appeal by the applicant, in a final judgment of 12 February 2004 (реш. № 1195 от 12 февруари 2004 г. по адм. д. № 9881/2003 г., ВАС, V о.) the  upheld the lower court’s judgment. It started by observing that it had to review the tacit refusal’s lawfulness by reference to the factual and legal grounds for the applicant’s request and the presumed reasons for its rejection. It went on to say that although the Constitution enshrined the right to obtain information from a State authority, that right was subject to limitations when, for instance, the information was classified. It was apparent from the relevant provisions of the Special Surveillance Means Act 1997 (see paragraphs 2324 below) that information relating to secret surveillance was classified. The refusal to provide such information was therefore compatible with the Constitution and Article 8 of the Convention. The applicant’s argument that the refusal had been in breach of the legislation on protection of personal data was unavailing, because material gathered through secret surveillance fell outside that legislation’s ambit, as did information on whether such surveillance had been authorised. The applicant’s further arguments that the information that he sought was not a State or official secret within the meaning of the Protection of Classified Information Act 2002 and could be divulged because of the expiry of the twoyear timelimit for its remaining classified were likewise unavailing, because that Act did not apply retrospectively.
In the meantime, on 30 May 2003 the applicant once more requested the president of the  to inform him whether any intercept warrants against him had been issued between 1 November 2001 and 29 May 2003. The court’s president declined to consider the request pending the outcome of the judicial review proceedings outlined in paragraphs 1112 above.
The applicant sought judicial review of what he saw as a tacit refusal to provide him the requested information. On 28 October 2003 the  dismissed his legal challenge, finding that the information sought by him was classified.
On an appeal by the applicant, in a final judgment of 15 May 2004 (реш. № 4408 от 15 май 2004 г. по адм. д. № 996/2004 г., ВАС, V о.) the  upheld the lower court’s judgment. It found that the applicant’s request had rightly been rejected, because information about secret surveillance was classified. Intelligence obtained pursuant to an intercept warrant, as well as the warrant itself, were also classified. The court went on to say that the fact that secret surveillance could be authorised solely by the presidents of the regional courts was sufficient to ensure independent judicial scrutiny of the executive’s actions and provided a sufficient safeguard against undue interferences with individual rights. The court also held that the refusal to provide the information sought by the applicant had not been in breach of his rights under Article 10 of the Convention, because the second paragraph of that Article allowed limitations on the rights enshrined in its first paragraph. The interests set out in the second paragraph enjoyed a higher degree of protection than the right to obtain and impart information, and their protection justified certain curtailment of individual rights.
On 4 February 2008 the applicant again requested the president of the  to inform him whether he had been subjected to secret surveillance between 1 January 1996 and 3 February 2008. On 6 February 2008 the court’s president replied that the information that the applicant was seeking was classified.
The applicant sought judicial review. All judges in the  withdrew from taking part in the case, and it was transferred to the .
On 24 September 2008 the  dismissed the applicant’s legal challenge, finding that information relating to the use of special means of surveillance and intelligence obtained through such means was classified and fell outside the ambit of the legislation on access to public information. Moreover, under section 33 of the Special Surveillance Means Act 1997 (see paragraph 24 below), any person who had come across information about the use of special means of surveillance under the conditions and according to the manner set out in the Act, or intelligence obtained thereby, was under a duty not to disclose it. The court went on to say that the refusal to provide the information sought by the applicant had not been in breach of his rights under Articles 8 or 10 of the Convention, because the second paragraphs of those Articles allowed limitations on the rights enshrined in their first paragraphs. The interests set out in the second paragraphs enjoyed a higher degree of protection than the right to obtain and impart information, and their protection justified the curtailment of individual rights. The fact that the Special Surveillance Means Act 1997 required judicial authorisation of secret surveillance ensured independent scrutiny of the executive and was a sufficient safeguard against unjustified encroachments on individual rights.
On an appeal by the applicant, in a final judgment of 15 July 2009 (реш. № 9720 от 15 юли 2009 г. по адм. д. № 15505/2008 г., ВАС, ІІІ о.) the  upheld the lower court’s judgment, saying that it fully agreed with its reasoning. The information requested by the applicant was classified. The refusal to provide it to him had therefore been fully justified. It had not given rise to a breach of the Convention, because the interests set out in Article 10 § 2 enjoyed a higher degree of protection than the right to obtain and impart information, and their protection justified the curtailment of individual rights.
The Government produced a letter dated 28 April 2009 from the Director of the National Security Agency, an entity created in 2008. The letter, in response to a query by the Government, said that the Agency had no information showing that the applicant had been subjected to secret surveillance between 1 January 1996 and 1 November 2001.
The Government also produced a letter dated 8 April 2009 from the president of the  in which, in response to a query by the Government, she said that the information whether the court had been requested to grant any judicial authorisations for secret surveillance of the applicant between 1 January 1996 and 1 November 2001 was classified.
In 2002 the applicant complained to the Varna Regional Military Prosecutor’s Office about the actions of certain police officers in relation to his earlier placement in a psychiatric hospital. That Office opened an inquiry into the matter. On 22 April 2004 the applicant asked it to provide him with copies of the materials in the file. A prosecutor of that Office refused. The applicant reiterated his request before the Military Appellate Prosecutor’s Office, apparently to no avail.
A description of the relevant provisions of the 1991 Constitution, the 1974 and 2005 Codes of Criminal Procedure, the Special Surveillance Means Act 1997, the Classified Information Act 2002, and the Access to Public Information Act 2000, as well as the caselaw of the domestic courts and other relevant material can be found in paragraphs 750 of the Court’s judgment in the case of Association for European Integration and Human Rights and Ekimdzhiev v. Bulgaria (no. 62540/00, 28 June 2007).
For the purposes of the present case, it should in particular be mentioned that under section 33 of the Special Surveillance Means Act 1997, any person who comes across information about the use of special means of surveillance under the conditions and according to the manner set out in the Act, or intelligence obtained thereby, is under a duty not to disclose it. By section 1(3) of the Classified Information Act 2002, “classified information” includes information which is a State or official secret. Section 25 of the Act defines a “State secret” as the “information set out in Schedule No. 1 [to section 25 of the Act], the unregulated access to which could endanger or prejudice the interests of the Republic of Bulgaria and which relates to national security, defence, foreign policy, or the protection of constitutional order”. Schedule No. 1 sets out the categories of information which are liable to be classified as being a State secret. They include (a) information about the organisation, methods and means used in the performance of specific tasks carried out by the security services and law enforcement agencies in their informationgathering and intelligence operations, information about their special devices, information and objects obtained as a result of such operations, and information allowing the identification of persons who have helped or continue to help them in their operations (point 3 of part II of the Schedule); (b) information about the lawful use of special means of surveillance (technical devices or the way in which they are used) (point 6 of part II of the Schedule); and (c) intelligence obtained as a result of the use of such means (point 8 of part II of the Schedule).
Following the Court’s judgment in Association for European Integration and Human Rights and Ekimdzhiev (cited above), on 14 October 2008 the Government laid before Parliament a bill for the amendment of the Special Surveillance Means Act 1997. The explanatory notes to the bill referred to the Court’s judgment and to the need to bring the Act into line with the requirements of the Convention. The bill was enacted on 15 December 2008 and came into force on 27 December 2008. Along with a host of other changes, the amendment created a National Bureau for Control of Special Means of Surveillance, an independent body whose five members were to be elected by Parliament and whose task was to oversee the use of special means of surveillance and the storing and destruction of material obtained through such means, and to protect individuals against the unlawful use of such means (new sections 34b(1), 34c and 34d). The Bureau was to be a permanently acting body having its own administration (new section 34b(3)). In carrying out its functions it could (a) ask the relevant authorities to provide it with information in relation to the use of special means of surveillance; (b) check whether those authorities kept accurate records; (c) access premises containing such records or material obtained though surveillance; (d) give mandatory instructions for improvements in the use of special means of surveillance and in the storage and destruction of material obtained though such means; and (e) inform the prosecuting authorities and the heads of the relevant authorities of instances of unlawful use of such means or of irregularities in the storage or destruction of material obtained though such means (new section 34g). The Bureau was to submit to Parliament an annual report setting out aggregated data on the matters that it was overseeing (new section 34b(5)). It was also to inform of its own motion persons who had been unlawfully subjected to surveillance, unless notification could jeopardise the purpose of the surveillance (section 34h).
On 22 October 2009, before the Bureau could start operating, Parliament enacted further amendments to the 1997 Act, abolishing the Bureau and replacing it with a special parliamentary commission, which has the same powers and duties, save for the power to give mandatory instructions (point (d) in the above paragraph); it may only make suggestions for improvements (section 34g, as amended in 2009). The amendments came into force on 10 November 2009. Under related amendments to Parliament’s standing rules, which came into force on 19 December 2009, that commission is in effect a permanent subcommission of Parliament’s legal affairs commission (new rule 24a(1)). It consists of one MP from each parliamentary group and has its own standing rules approved by Parliament (new rule 24a(2)). Those rules were adopted on 11 February 2010. The commission, whose current five members were elected by Parliament on 22 December 2009, is assisted by fifteen parliamentary staffers (rule 24a(3) of Parliament’s standing rules and rule 14 of the commission’s standing rules). It must sit, behind closed doors and in line with the rules governing classified information, at least once every week (rules 9 and 13 of the commission’s standing rules).
Under section 34h of the 1997 Act, as amended, the commission must inform of its own motion persons who have been unlawfully subjected to secret surveillance, unless notification might jeopardise the purpose of the surveillance, allow the divulgation of operational methods or technical devices, or put the life or health of an undercover agent or his or her relatives or friends in jeopardy.
The commission has thus far submitted three annual reports: the first was submitted in May 2010 and accepted by Parliament on 16 June 2010, the second was submitted in May 2011 and accepted by Parliament on 18 May 2011, and the third was submitted on 4 July 2012 and has yet to be accepted by Parliament. In that latest report the commission said, inter alia, that it had received a number of complaints from individuals, and had taken measures to examine them. It had carried out inspections in seven towns, and had noted many irregularities, such as insufficiently reasoned applications for judicial authorisation of secret surveillance, failures to destroy material obtained through such surveillance within the statutory timelimits, and failures to report back to the court which had authorised surveillance. The commission went on to say that the lack of proper recordkeeping made it difficult to oversee the operation of the system as a whole. It also noted the very low percentage of refused applications for judicial authorisation of secret surveillance. The total number of requests in 2011 had been 13,846. Only 116 had been refused, chiefly on purely technical grounds. 7,881 persons had been subjected to surveillance. 747 requests had yielded material subsequently used in criminal trials. The analysis of the available data showed that the authorities were not using secret surveillance as a means of last resort, but routinely, mainly because it was an almost effortless way of gathering evidence. It was therefore necessary to tighten up the relevant regulations and to strengthen judicial control. The commission made a number of specific proposals in that respect.
Section 2(1) of the Act originally called the State Responsibility for Damage Caused to Citizens Act 1988, renamed on 12 July 2006 the State and Municipalities Responsibility for Damage Act 1988, provides for liability of the investigating and prosecuting authorities or the courts in several situations: unlawful detention; bringing of charges or conviction and sentencing, if the proceedings have later been abandoned or the conviction has been set aside; coercive medical treatment or coercive measures imposed by a court, if its decision has later been quashed as being unlawful; and serving of a sentence over and above its prescribed duration.
On 10 March 2009 a new point 7 was added to section 2(1). It provides that the State is liable for damage which the investigating and prosecuting authorities or the courts have caused to individuals through the unlawful use of special means of surveillance. There is no reported caselaw under that provision.
In their caselaw the Supreme Court of Cassation and the Supreme Administrative Court have held that the liability provisions of the 1988 Act – including those added after the Act was originally enacted – confer on the persons concerned a substantive right to claim damages, and have no retrospective effect (реш. № 63 от 21 февруари 1997 г. по гр. д. № 2180/ 1996 г., ВС; реш. № 529 от 17 юли 2001 г. по гр. д. № 24/2001 г., ВКС; опр. № 9134 от 3 октомври 2007 г. по адм. д. № 8175/2007 г., ВАС, ІІІ о.; опр. № 1046 от 6 август 2009 г. по гр. д. № 635/2009 г., ВКС, ІІІ г. о.; опр. № 1047 от 7 август 2009 г. по гр. д. № 738/2009 г., ВКС, III г. о.; реш. № 335 от 31 май 2010 г. по гр. д. № 840/2009 г., ВКС, III г. о.; реш. № 329 от 4 юни 2010 г. по гр. д. № 883/2009 г., ВКС, IV г. о.).
The Council of Europe’s Committee of Ministers, which under Article 46 § 2 of the Convention has the duty to supervise the execution of the Court’s judgments, is still examining the execution by Bulgaria of the Court’s judgment in Association for European Integration and Human Rights and Ekimdzhiev (cited above). According to information published on the Committee’s website, the case is currently under “enhanced supervision”. The latest developments were that on 2 March 2011 the Bulgarian Government had submitted an action report, that on 23 August 2011 they had provided further information, and that on 26 June 2012 they had submitted a further action report (in which they had, inter alia, said that they were not aware of any caselaw under the new point 7 of section 2(1) of the 1988 Act – see paragraph 30 above). Bilateral contacts were still under way between the Committee’s administration and the Government with a view to gathering more information necessary for the presentation of a revised action plan or report to the Committee.