The case originated in an application (no. 7725/04) against  lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Russian national, Mr Igor Vasilyevich Konotenko (“the applicant”), on 2 February 2004.
The Ukrainian Government (“the Government”) were represented by Mr Y. Zaytsev, their Agent, and Mrs I. Shevchuk, Head of the Office of the Government Agent before the European Court of Human Rights.
On 30 May 2006 the Court decided to communicate the complaints concerning the delay in the enforcement of a judgment given in the applicant's favour to the Government. Under the provisions of Article 29 § 3 of the Convention, it decided to examine the merits of the application at the same time as its admissibility.
In accordance with Article 36 § 1 of the Convention, the Russian Government were invited to exercise their right to intervene in the proceedings, but they declined to do so.
The applicant was born in 1963 and lives in Sidorovka, in the Rostov region of the .
On 18 May 1999 the  (Ровеньківський міський суд Луганської області) awarded the applicant 8,895.36 hryvnyas (UAH) against his former Ukrainian employer, the State-owned OJSC Mine “Dzerzhynskogo” (Державне відкрите акціонерне товариство «Шахта ім. Дзержинського»), in disability benefits and other payments.
This judgment was not appealed against, became final, and enforcement proceedings were instituted to collect the debt.
The debt was paid to the applicant in numerous small instalments, the last payment of UAH 363.46 having been made on 17 June 2005.
As explained by the bailiffs' service, the enforcement of the judgment had been delayed on account of numerous reasons, including a prolonged reorganization of the debtor, insufficient funds and a tax lien imposed on its property, as well as a statutory moratorium on the forced sale of the State property.
The relevant domestic law is summarised in the judgment in the case of Romashov v. Ukraine (no. 67534/01, §§ 16-19, 27 July 2004).