The case originated in an application (no. 21846/08) against the  lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Croatian national, Mr Zoran Pavić (“the applicant”), on 9 April 2008.
The applicant was represented by Mrs M. Okić, a lawyer practising in . The Croatian Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Mrs Š. Stažnik.
On 16 March 2009 the President of the First Section decided to give notice of the application to the Government. It was also decided to examine the merits of the application at the same time as its admissibility (Article 29 § 3).
The applicant was born in 1971 and lives in .
On 14 March 1988 the applicant brought a civil action against his then employer in the Zagreb Basic Court of Associated Labour (Osnovni sud udruženog rada u Zagrebu), seeking damages in connection with an employment-related accident. The case was later on transferred to the Zagreb Municipal Court (Općinski sud u Zagrebu).
On 29 May 2006 the applicant lodged a request for the protection of the right to a hearing within a reasonable time with the Zagreb County Court (Županijski sud u Zagrebu) complaining about the length of the above civil proceedings.
On 14 March 2007 the Zagreb Municipal Court orally pronounced its ruling as to the applicant’s civil claim and awarded him compensation for the employment-related accident. At this moment in time, however, the applicant did not receive a written copy of the judgment ( see paragraph 12 below).
On 25 April 2007 the  found a violation of the applicant’s right to a hearing within a reasonable time. It awarded him compensation in the amount of 6,500 Croatian kuna (HRK), and ordered the Zagreb Municipal Court to decide the case as quickly as possible but in any case within six months.
On 21 May 2007 the applicant appealed against the Zagreb County Court decision, contesting the amount of compensation awarded, the six-month time-limit and the dismissal of his claim for the costs of proceedings.
On 4 October 2007 the applicant’s appeal was forwarded to the Supreme Court of the  (Vrhovni sud Republike Hrvatske).
On 11 January 2008 the applicant lodged a constitutional complaint as he did not receive the Municipal Court decision within six months as ordered by the County Court. In a letter of 23 January 2008 the  notified the applicant that it was not competent to supervise the implementation of the higher court’s decisions ordering lower courts to decide a case within a certain time-limit.
The written copy of the Zagreb Municipal Court’s judgment of 14 March 2007 (see paragraph 7 above) was served on the applicant’s counsel on 22 February 2008. In the meantime, on 14 January 2008 the defendant had lodged an appeal against the first instance judgment with the Zagreb County Court.
On 30 June 2008 the Supreme Court accepted the applicant’s appeal of 21 May 2007 against the County Court’s decision of 25 April 2007, concerning the length of proceedings and awarded him an additional amount of HRK 6,500 in compensation.
On 13 January 2009 the County Court partly upheld the first instance judgment of 14 March 2007.
Article 29 § 1 of the Constitution (Ustav Republike Hrvatske, Official Gazette no. 41/2001 of 7 May 2001) reads as follows:
“In the determination of his rights and obligations or of any criminal charge against him, everyone is entitled to a fair hearing within a reasonable time by an independent and impartial court established by law.”
The relevant part of the Courts Act (Zakon o sudovima, Official Gazette nos. 150/05, 16/07 and 113/08), which entered into force on 29 December 2005, reads as follows:
PROTECTION OF THE RIGHT TO A HEARING WITHIN A REASONABLE TIME
Section 27
 “(1) A party to court proceedings who considers that the competent court failed to decide within a reasonable time on his or her rights or obligations or a criminal charge against him or her, may lodge a request for the protection of the right to a hearing within a reasonable time with the immediately higher court.
(2) If the request concerns proceedings pending before the High Commercial Court of the Republic of Croatia, the High Court for Administrative Offences of the Republic of Croatia or the Administrative Court of the Republic of Croatia, the request shall be decided by the Supreme Court of the .
(3) The proceedings for deciding the request referred to in paragraph 1 of this section shall be urgent. The rules of non-contentious procedure shall apply mutatis mutandis in those proceedings and, in principle, no hearing shall be held.
Section 28
 (1) If the court referred to in section 27 of this Act finds the request well founded, it shall set a time-limit within which the court before which the proceedings are pending must decide on a right or obligation of, or a criminal charge against, the person who lodged the request, and shall award him or her appropriate compensation for the violation of his or her right to a hearing within a reasonable time.
(2) The compensation shall be paid out of the State budget within three months of the date the party’s request for payment is lodged.
(3) An appeal, to be lodged within fifteen days with the Supreme Court, lies against a decision on the request for the protection of the right to a hearing within a reasonable time. No appeal lies against a Supreme Court decision, but a constitutional complaint may be lodged.”