The case originated in an application (no. 59793/17) against the Republic of Lithuania lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by seven Russian nationals, Mr M.A. (“the first applicant”), Ms M.A. (“the second applicant”) and their five children (“the remaining applicants”), on 25 July 2017. The Court decided that the applicants’ identities should not be disclosed to the public (Rule 47 § 4 of the Rules of Court).
The applicants were represented by Mr M. Matsiushchankau, a human rights activist residing in Minsk. The Lithuanian Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Ms K. Bubnytė-Širmenė.
The applicants alleged that the Lithuanian border authorities had refused to accept their asylum applications and initiate asylum proceedings, and that they had not had an effective remedy against those decisions. They invoked Articles 3 and 13 of the Convention.
On 11 October 2017 the application was communicated to the Government.
The first applicant was born in 1988, the second applicant was born in 1994 and the remaining applicants were born in 2010-2016. According to the last letter sent by their representative to the Court on 20 May 2018, they currently reside in Poland, where their asylum applications are under consideration.
The applicants used to live in the Chechen Republic. As submitted by them, the events leading to their departure were as follows.
In 2005-2006 the first applicant started having problems with the Russian security services. He believed that that was happening because his relatives had participated in the Second Chechen War. Officers from the district police came to his home and questioned him at a police station, and his home was raided by armed people wearing masks. In 2009 he decided to leave Chechnya and applied for international protection in Poland, and later moved to Austria. However, in 2010 he had to return to Chechnya. There, he started working in the State security system, where he participated in counter-terrorism operations and provided security to the highest officials of Chechnya. He quit that job in October 2015, but before that he and his mother were asked if he was planning to join illegal armed groups in Syria. In February 2017 he was taken to the headquarters of the department at which he worked and asked to become an informer; he refused. In March 2017 two police officers came to his home and forcefully took him to a police station, where he was again asked to become an informer and again he refused. Afterwards he was tortured – he was given electric shocks and beaten on the kidneys, head and other parts of his body. After that he agreed to become an informer and was released after five days of detention. Following the beating, the first applicant started suffering from health problems, such as pain in the kidneys and problems with his memory.
In April 2017 the applicants left Chechnya and went to Belarus with the aim of crossing into Poland. They submitted that they had attempted to lodge asylum applications several times on the Polish border, but each time the border guards had refused to accept their applications and returned them to Belarus (see M.A. and Others v. Poland, no. 42902/17, Statement of Facts and Questions to the Parties; see also paragraphs 22-26 below for further events and the applicants’ eventual acceptance into Poland).
On 16 April 2017, around noon, the applicants arrived at the Medininkai checkpoint on the border between Lithuania and Belarus. They submitted to the Court that they had told the border guards in Russian that they were seeking asylum, but asylum proceedings had not been initiated.
The State Border Guard Service (hereinafter “the SBGS”) issued decisions on refusal of entry in respect of all seven applicants. The decisions indicated that the applicants had been refused entry on the grounds that they did not have valid visas or residence permits. It was also indicated that the decisions could be appealed against before a regional administrative court within fourteen days. The decisions were written in Lithuanian and English.
The applicants were asked to sign the decisions. In the space for a signature on each of the seven decisions, the first and second applicants wrote “azul’” in Cyrillic (азуль) – they submitted to the Court that that word was often used by Chechen asylum seekers to mean “asylum”.
The border officer who was on duty at the Medininkai checkpoint that day submitted the following official report to a senior officer:
“I hereby inform you that on 16 April 2017, at 12.15 p.m., at the Medininkai border checkpoint ... a Russian national [M.A.] ... who had arrived on foot ... was refused entry into Lithuania.
The reason for refusal of entry – absence of a valid visa or residence permit.
At 12.45 p.m. the alien was returned to Belarus.
His documents were checked by a senior border officer [A.B.].”
Reports with similar wording were drawn up with respect to each of the applicants.
The applicants were returned to Belarus on that same day. They did not appeal against the decisions refusing them entry into Lithuania.
On 11 May 2017, around noon, the applicants arrived at the Kena checkpoint on the border between Lithuania and Belarus. They submitted to the Court that they had told the border guards that they were seeking international protection and asylum and that the first applicant had been tortured in Chechnya. However, asylum proceedings were not initiated.
The SBGS issued decisions on refusal of entry in respect of all seven applicants, with the same content as before (see paragraph 10 above). The decisions were written in Lithuanian. The first and second applicants signed all seven decisions and wrote that the decisions had been translated into Russian.
The border officer who was on duty at the Kena checkpoint that day submitted the following official report to a senior officer:
“I hereby inform you that on 11 May 2017 ... when I was examining the train [from Moscow to Kaliningrad], at around 12:00 p.m., the following Russian nationals [the applicants] submitted their documents for inspection. None of them had valid visas or residence permits, and therefore they were refused entry into the Republic of Lithuania. Seven refusal of entry decisions were issued in respect of these individuals ...
At 3.10 p.m. the individuals were transferred to border officers of Belarus via the Medininkai border checkpoint.”
The applicants were detained at the border checkpoint for several hours and then they were returned to Belarus. They did not appeal against the decisions to refuse them entry into Lithuania.
On 22 May 2017, at around 10.20 p.m., the applicants arrived at the railway border checkpoint in Vilnius. They submitted to the Court that they had had with them a written asylum application in Russian, prepared by a Belarussian human rights organisation, and they had given that application to the Lithuanian border guards. They provided the Court with a copy of that application and a photograph of the application, together with their train tickets, taken on what they claimed to be the premises of the border checkpoint. However, asylum proceedings were not initiated.
The SBGS issued decisions on refusal of entry in respect of all seven applicants, with the same content as before (see paragraphs 10 and 15 above). The first and second applicants signed the decisions concerning them, but those concerning the children (the remaining applicants) were not signed. The decisions were written in Lithuanian and it was not indicated on them whether they had been translated into Russian.
The border officer who was on duty at the Vilnius railway checkpoint that day submitted the following official report to a senior officer:
“I hereby inform you that on 22 May 2017 I was on duty at the Vilnius railway border checkpoint.
At around 10.50 p.m. ..., upon the arrival of a passenger train [from Minsk to Vilnius], it was detected that nationals of the Russian Federation did not have valid Schengen visas or residence permits ...
...
The above-mentioned individuals were returned via the Medininkai border checkpoint on 23 May 2017, at 4.24 a.m.”
The report mentioned the names of the second applicant and three of the children. The Court has not been informed if a similar report was drawn up with regard to the first applicant and the other two children.
The applicants were detained at the border checkpoint overnight, and in the morning of 23 May 2017 they were returned to Belarus. They did not appeal against the decisions refusing them entry into Lithuania.
Subsequently, the applicants again attempted to submit asylum applications in Poland, without success, and they lodged an application against Poland before this Court. On 16 June 2017 the Court decided to apply Rule 39 of the Rules of Court, indicating to the Polish Government that the applicants should not be removed to Belarus. However, it appears that they were removed (see M.A. and Others v. Poland, Statement of Facts and Questions to the Parties cited above).
The applicants’ stay in Belarus was legal until 10 July 2017.
Between October and December 2017 the first applicant’s relatives in Chechnya received several summonses, addressed to him, obliging him to appear before the police. In December 2017 a summons was delivered to the first applicant in Belarus. He went to a police station there and was told that all the applicants had to leave Belarus. They returned to Russia at the end of December 2017. Soon afterwards the first applicant was detained. The second applicant had not been informed about the exact location of the first applicant’s detention.
In January 2018 the second applicant and the remaining applicants went to Belarus again and managed to submit asylum applications on the Polish border. They were admitted to a refugee reception centre in Poland to await the decision on their asylum applications.
In February 2018 the first applicant was released from detention in Russia. He submitted that he had not known where he had been held and that he had been beaten up by the staff at the detention facility. He provided the Court with photographs of bruises on his body which he claimed to have sustained in detention. In March 2018 the first applicant travelled to Belarus and managed to submit an asylum application on the Polish border. He joined the second applicant and the remaining applicants at a refugee reception centre in Poland to await the decision on his asylum application.
Article 2 § 183 of the Law on the Legal Status of Aliens (hereinafter “the Aliens Law”) defines an asylum application as a request to be granted asylum in the Republic of Lithuania, expressed by an alien in any form. Article 2 § 20 defines an asylum seeker as an alien who has submitted an asylum application in line with the requirements set out in the Aliens Law where a final decision in respect of that application has not yet been taken.
Article 65 provides that aliens have the right to seek and obtain asylum in Lithuania in line with the requirements set out in the Aliens Law. When there are indications that an alien who is in detention or at a border checkpoint or in the transit zone may wish to seek asylum, he or she must be informed, in a language that he or she understands, about such a right and the applicable procedures.
Article 67 § 1 provides that at border checkpoints and on territory subject to the legal regime relating to borders, an asylum application may be submitted the SBGS, and on any other territory of the Republic of Lithuania it may be submitted to the SBGS or a territorial police agency. Article 67 § 2 provides that an asylum seeker has to submit an application on his or her own behalf, and an application on behalf of minors may be submitted by an adult family member or a representative.
Article 69 §§ 1, 3 and 5 provide that an institution to which an asylum application has been submitted must, inter alia, note the date, time and place of the submission of such an application, interview the asylum seekers and assess whether they have any special needs, obtain their identity and travel documents, take their fingerprints, inspect their belongings, and within twenty-four hours forward all that information to the Migration Department.
Article 76 §§ 1 and 6 provide that the decision on whether to examine an asylum application on the merits is taken by the Migration Department within forty-eight hours of the submission of such an application.
Article 8 § 2 provides that a decision to deny an alien entry into Lithuania is taken by the SBGS, but such a decision cannot be taken with regard to an alien who has submitted an asylum application. Article 5 § 3 provides that when an alien submits an asylum application at a border checkpoint, the decision as to whether to allow him or her to enter into Lithuania is taken by the Migration Department.
Article 67 § 5 provides that all decisions adopted in accordance with the Aliens Law must take into account the best interests of children and vulnerable persons.
Article 86 § 1 provides that refugee status is granted to an individual who, owing to well-founded fear of being persecuted for reasons of race, religion, nationality, membership of a particular social group or political opinion, is outside the country of his or her nationality and is unable or, owing to such fear, is unwilling to avail himself or herself of the protection of that country; or who, not having a nationality and being outside the country of his former habitual residence as a result of such events, is unable or, owing to such fear, is unwilling to return to it, unless there are reasons, provided in the Aliens Law, for which refugee status may not be granted (for example, when the individual is already receiving protection or assistance from organs or agencies of the United Nations other than UNHCR, or when there are serious grounds to believe that he or she has committed a war crime or a crime against humanity).
Article 87 § 1 provides that subsidiary protection is granted to an individual who is outside the country of his or her nationality and is unable to return to it owing to well-founded fear of torture or inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment; the death penalty or execution; or a serious and individual threat to his or her life or person by reason of indiscriminate violence in situations of international or internal armed conflict.
Article 130 § 1 provides that an alien cannot be removed to a country in which there is a risk to his or her life or liberty; or where he or she may be persecuted on the grounds of his or her race, religion, nationality, membership of a social group, or political beliefs; or from which he or she may be removed to another such country. Article 130 § 2 provides that an alien cannot be removed to a country in which he or she may be subjected to torture or cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment.
Article 138 provides that decisions taken in accordance with the Aliens Law can be appealed against to a regional administrative court within fourteen days. Article 5 § 5 provides that during the time allowed for such an appeal, aliens have the right to remain in the territory of Lithuania and asylum seekers have the right to remain at the border checkpoint.
Article 139 § 1 provides that when an appeal is lodged, the impugned decision is suspended in the following instances: (1) the decision was to revoke an alien’s residence permit; (2) the decision was to decline to examine an asylum application submitted by an alien who had arrived in Lithuania from a safe third country; (3) the decision was to reject an asylum application (with some exceptions). Article 139 § 2 provides that, in other instances, an administrative court may order interim measures and suspend the impugned decision.
The Order on Granting and Withdrawing Asylum in the Republic of Lithuania (hereinafter “the Order”) was issued by the Minister of Interior on 24 February 2016 and amended on 31 January 2017. Its point 19 provides that an asylum application is considered to have been submitted when it is submitted to one of the institutions listed in Article 67 § 1 of the Aliens Law and in line with the requirements of Article 67 § 2 of that Law (see paragraph 29 above). An asylum application has to be substantiated and has to present facts which demonstrate the asylum seeker’s well-founded fear of persecution or serious harm as defined by the Aliens Law (see paragraphs 34 and 35 above). If an asylum application is unsubstantiated, the reasons for its submission have to be established during the initial interview with the asylum seeker, in accordance with point 22.10 of the Order (see paragraph 43 below).
Point 20 provides that if an asylum application is submitted to an institution which is not listed in Article 67 § 1 of the Aliens Law, or if it does not fulfil the requirements of Article 67 § 2 of that Law, within two days of that application being identified as an application for asylum, it is returned to the alien and he or she has to be informed about the procedure of submitting an asylum application. That information is provided to the alien in a language which he or she understands.
Point 21 provides that an asylum application is considered accepted when an authorised official of the accepting institution registers the asylum application and the asylum seeker’s data in the Aliens Register.
Point 22.1 provides that when an asylum application has been submitted in writing, an authorised official must take the application from the asylum seeker and write on it the date, time and place of its submission. Point 22.2 provides that when an asylum application has not been submitted in writing, an authorised official must draw up a written report, indicating the information provided by the asylum seeker, the date, time and place of the submission of the application, and the name of the official who drew up the report. Point 22.7 provides that the authorised official must register the asylum application and the information about the asylum seeker in the Aliens Register.
Point 22.10 provides that the authorised official must conduct the initial interview with the asylum seeker and prepare the record of the interview, following the relevant form appended to the Order. The purpose of the initial interview is to collect information about the asylum seeker and his or her family members who have arrived together, their route to Lithuania, and their reasons for seeking asylum, among other things. Before the initial interview, the asylum seeker must be acquainted with, among other things, the purpose of the interview, the rights and duties of an asylum seeker, and the consequences of failing to comply with them.
Point 23 provides that the actions listed in points 22.1 to 22.12 (see paragraphs 42 and 43 above) also have to be carried out outside of working hours.
The Statute of the SBGS at the Ministry of Interior was adopted by the Government of the Republic of Lithuania on 22 February 2001 and amended several times. At the material time, its point 13.6 provided that the duties of the SBGS included the organisation, coordination and control of the acceptance of asylum applications submitted at border checkpoints or on territory subject to the legal regime relating to borders, in accordance with the Aliens Law.
The Regulations on Border Control were adopted by the SBGS on 31 January 2012 and amended several times. At the material time and at present, their points 114.14 and 240.10 provide that the duties of senior shift officers include the duty to accept applications for asylum in Lithuania submitted by aliens.
On 2 June 2010 the SBGS, the UN High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) Regional Office for the Baltic and Nordic Countries, and the Lithuanian Red Cross signed a Memorandum of Understanding on cooperation when dealing with questions related to asylum seekers. Pursuant to Article 4 of that memorandum, the SBGS undertook to use all means necessary in order to ensure: that aliens who seek asylum have the appropriate conditions to submit asylum applications at border checkpoints; that asylum seekers are acquainted, in a language they understand, with their legal status in Lithuania and their right to State-guaranteed legal aid; that information about asylum proceedings, prepared by UNHCR or non-governmental organisations, is distributed at border checkpoints; that representatives of UNHCR are able to monitor the submission of asylum applications at the border and the ensuing actions of border officials; and that asylum seekers have the possibility to contact representatives of UNHCR.
On 14 September 2017 four Russian nationals arrived at the border of Lithuania by train from Belarus and were refused entry on the grounds that they did not have valid visas or residence permits; they were returned to Belarus that same day. Their representative lodged a complaint before an administrative court, arguing that the four individuals had submitted asylum applications at the border which the border guards had refused to accept.
On 14 December 2017 the Vilnius Regional Administrative Court allowed the complaint in part and ordered the SBGS to allow the four individuals to enter into Lithuania and to submit asylum applications. The court stated:
“In this administrative case there is no dispute that the appellants clearly expressed their wish to submit asylum applications and that they submitted such applications to officers of the SBGS ... However, the SBGS did not accept [the applications], without providing any reasons. At the court hearing, [the SBGS’s] representative explained that the appellants’ asylum applications had not been accepted because they had been unsubstantiated. The court notes that officers of the SBGS have a duty to accept asylum applications, irrespective of whether or not they are substantiated – [if applications are unsubstantiated, officers have to] conduct initial interviews with asylum seekers and clarify their reasons [for requesting asylum] (see points 19 and 22.10 of the Order on Granting and Withdrawing Asylum in the Republic of Lithuania, issued by the Minister of Interior on 24 February 2016). Officers of the SBGS may not remain inactive with respect to asylum seekers, as they did in this case. Accordingly, in this administrative case, having regard to the factual circumstances, it must be concluded that the SBGS did not take the proper action to ensure that asylum applications were accepted and examined, and it thereby breached the principle of good administration, as well as points 19 and 22.10 of the Order on Granting and Withdrawing Asylum in the Republic of Lithuania.”
On 14 February 2018 the Supreme Administrative Court upheld the lower court’s decision in its entirety. The court stated:
“It being demonstrated that the appellants had submitted asylum applications but that [those applications] had not been examined in accordance with law, the Vilnius Regional Administrative Court made a lawful and well-founded conclusion that officers of the SBGS had a duty to accept asylum applications, irrespective of whether or not they were substantiated, and that the SBGS had breached the principle of good administration and points 19 and 22.10 of the Order on Granting and Withdrawing Asylum in the Republic of Lithuania. The appellants submitted their asylum applications to the appropriate institution, but the SBGS refused to accept them, without giving any reasons.”
The 1951 Geneva Convention relating to the Status of Refugees (hereinafter “the 1951 Refugee Convention”), together with the 1967 Protocol relating to the Status of Refugees, was ratified by Lithuania on 28 April 1997. The relevant parts of it provide:
“A. For the purposes of the present Convention, the term ‘refugee’ shall apply to any person who:
 ...
(2) ... owing to well-founded fear of being persecuted for reasons of race, religion, nationality, membership of a particular social group or political opinion, is outside the country of his nationality and is unable or, owing to such fear, is unwilling to avail himself of the protection of that country; or who, not having a nationality and being outside the country of his former habitual residence as a result of such events, is unable or, owing to such fear, is unwilling to return to it ...”
“1. The Contracting States shall not impose penalties, on account of their illegal entry or presence, on refugees who, coming directly from a territory where their life or freedom was threatened in the sense of article 1, enter or are present in their territory without authorization, provided they present themselves without delay to the authorities and show good cause for their illegal entry or presence ...”
“1. No Contracting State shall expel or return (“refouler”) a refugee in any manner whatsoever to the frontiers of territories where his life or freedom would be threatened on account of his race, religion, nationality, membership of a particular social group or political opinion.
The benefit of the present provision may not, however, be claimed by a refugee whom there are reasonable grounds for regarding as a danger to the security of the country in which he is, or who, having been convicted by a final judgment of a particularly serious crime, constitutes a danger to the community of that country.”
The UNHCR Executive Committee, at its twenty-eighth session held in October 1977, adopted the following recommendations:
“[P]rocedures for the determination of refugee status should satisfy the following basic requirements:
(i) The competent official (e.g., immigration officer or border police officer) to whom the applicant addresses himself at the border or in the territory of a Contracting State should have clear instructions for dealing with cases which might come within the purview of the relevant international instruments. He should be required to act in accordance with the principle of non-refoulement and to refer such cases to a higher authority.
(ii) The applicant should receive the necessary guidance as to the procedure to be followed.
(iii) There should be a clearly identified authority – wherever possible a single central authority with responsibility for examining requests for refugee status and taking a decision in the first instance.
(iv) The applicant should be given the necessary facilities, including the services of a competent interpreter, for submitting his case to the authorities concerned. Applicants should also be given the opportunity, of which they should be duly informed, to contact a representative of UNHCR ...”
In 2016, during the second cycle of the Universal Periodic Review in respect of Lithuania, UNHCR provided the following submissions to the Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights:
“III. KEY PROTECTION ISSUES, CHALLENGES AND RECOMMENDATIONS
Issue 1: Admission to the territory and access to asylum procedures
As result of the implementation of the Memorandum of Understanding on border monitoring activities, authored by the SBGS, UNHCR and the Lithuanian Red Cross in 2010, a greater number of persons seeking international protection have been identified at the Lithuanian border. Nevertheless, some concerns regarding access to the territory and asylum procedure remain. For example, in a non-pecuniary damage case, the Supreme Court of Lithuania has established that, despite sufficiently clear articulations of protection related reasons for their flight, two Afghan nationals were denied access to the asylum procedure. Instead they were prosecuted and placed in pre-trial custody in relation to irregular border crossing.
UNHCR is aware of other similar instances whereby delays in accessing asylum procedures have occurred.
...
UNHCR emphasizes that a wish to apply for protection does not need to be expressed in any particular form and that the word “asylum” does not need to be used expressly. Any expression of fear of return to one’s home country is enough to indicate a possible need for asylum. Therefore, where there are indications that third-country nationals or stateless persons fear return to their home countries or countries of prior habitual residence, the representatives of the SBGS must provide them with information on asylum procedures, register their asylum applications without delay, and refer those cases to the central determining authority.
Recommendation:
UNHCR recommends that the Government of Lithuania:
Ensure that persons who may seek international protection are proactively identified, including at border-crossing points and detention facilities, provided with information about the asylum procedure, registered as asylum-seekers, and referred to the determining asylum authority without delay.”
The relevant parts of Recommendation No. R (81) 16 of the Committee of Ministers to member States on the harmonisation of national procedures relating to asylum, adopted on 5 November 1981 at the 339th meeting of the Ministers’ Deputies, provide:
“1. All asylum requests shall be dealt with objectively and impartially.
The decision on an asylum request shall be taken only by a central authority.
Clear instructions for dealing with asylum requests with a view to their being forwarded to the central authority shall be given to the authorities responsible for frontier control, as well as to local authorities called upon to deal with such requests. These instructions shall in particular:
draw the attention of the said authorities especially to the obligation to respect the principle of non-refoulement;
require these authorities to provide the central authority with all possible information with a view to the examination of the request;
emphasise the need to take into consideration the particular situation in which the asylum seeker finds himself, including, as the case may be, difficulties he might experience in presenting his request.
As long as the central authority referred to in paragraph 2 has not taken a decision on the asylum request, the applicant shall be allowed to remain in the territory of the state, unless the competent central authority has established that the request is manifestly based on grounds having no connection with asylum, in particular that it is fraudulent or is related neither to the criteria for the granting of refugee status laid down in Article 1.A(2) of the 1951 Geneva Convention nor to other criteria justifying the granting of asylum.
...”
The relevant parts of Recommendation No. R (98) 15 of the Committee of Ministers to member States on the training of officials who first come into contact with asylum seekers, in particular at border points, adopted on 15 December 1998 at the 652nd meeting of the Ministers’ Deputies, provide:
“...
Bearing in mind that, in order to fulfil their important tasks in an effective manner and to prevent refoulement and the turning away of the asylum seeker at the border as well as to ensure unimpeded access to the asylum procedure by those seeking asylum, officials who first come into contact with asylum seekers, in particular those fulfilling their duties at border points, need appropriate and adequate, initial and in-service training on how to recognise requests for protection and handle specific situations in connection with asylum seekers;
...
Recommends to member states that officials who first come into contact with asylum seekers should receive training on how to recognise requests for protection and handle specific situations in connection with asylum seekers.
For those of such officials who are required to refer these asylum seekers to the competent asylum authority, their training should lead to the acquisition of:
1. basic knowledge of the provisions of national legislation related to the protection of asylum seekers and refugees, including the relevant administrative issues and knowledge of internal instructions, wherever applicable, on how to deal with asylum seekers;
2. basic knowledge of the provisions of the 1951 Convention and 1967 Protocol Relating to the Status of Refugees and general principles of refugee protection as provided by international law, in particular the prohibition of refoulement and the situation of refugees staying unlawfully in the country of refuge;
3. basic knowledge of the provisions relating to the prohibition of torture and inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment as enshrined in the European Convention on Human Rights;
4. basic knowledge concerning limitations under national and international law to the use of detention;
5. skills to detect and understand asylum requests even in cases where asylum seekers are not in a position clearly to communicate their intention to seek asylum, as well as basic communication skills concerning how to address asylum seekers, including those with special needs;
6. the skill to make the correct choice and use of an interpreter when necessary.
...”
Relevant provisions of the Charter of Fundamental Rights of the European Union read:
“The right to asylum shall be guaranteed with due respect for the rules of the Geneva Convention of 28 July 1951 and the Protocol of 31 January 1967 relating to the status of refugees and in accordance with the Treaty on European Union and the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union (hereinafter referred to as ‘the Treaties’).”
“...
No one may be removed, expelled or extradited to a State where there is a serious risk that he or she would be subjected to the death penalty, torture or other inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment.”
The relevant parts of Regulation (EU) 2016/399 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 9 March 2016 on a Union Code on the rules governing the movement of persons across borders (“the Schengen Borders Code”) provide:
“...
(36) This Regulation respects fundamental rights and observes the principles recognised in particular by the Charter of Fundamental Rights of the European Union. It should be applied in accordance with the Member States’ obligations as regards international protection and non-refoulement ...”
“This Regulation shall apply to any person crossing the internal or external borders of Member States, without prejudice to:
...
(b) the rights of refugees and persons requesting international protection, in particular as regards non-refoulement.”
“When applying this Regulation, Member States shall act in full compliance with relevant Union law, including the Charter of Fundamental Rights of the European Union (‘the Charter’), relevant international law, including the Convention Relating to the Status of Refugees done at Geneva on 28 July 1951 (‘the Geneva Convention’), obligations related to access to international protection, in particular the principle of non-refoulement, and fundamental rights. In accordance with the general principles of Union law, decisions under this Regulation shall be taken on an individual basis ...”
“1. A third-country national who does not fulfil all the entry conditions ... shall be refused entry to the territories of the Member States. This shall be without prejudice to the application of special provisions concerning the right of asylum and to international protection or the issue of long-stay visas.
Entry may only be refused by a substantiated decision stating the precise reasons for the refusal. The decision shall be taken by an authority empowered by national law. It shall take effect immediately.
...
Persons refused entry shall have the right to appeal. Appeals shall be conducted in accordance with national law. A written indication of contact points able to provide information on representatives competent to act on behalf of the third-country national in accordance with national law shall also be given to the third-country national.
Lodging such an appeal shall not have suspensive effect on a decision to refuse entry ...”
“1. The border control ... shall be carried out by border guards in accordance with the provisions of this Regulation and with national law.
...
Member States shall ensure that the border guards are specialised and properly trained professionals ... Training curricula shall include specialised training for detecting and dealing with situations involving vulnerable persons, such as unaccompanied minors and victims of trafficking. Member States ... shall encourage border guards to learn the languages necessary for the carrying-out of their tasks ...”
The relevant parts of Directive 2011/95/EU of the European Parliament and of the Council of 13 December 2011 on standards for the qualification of third-country nationals or stateless persons as beneficiaries of international protection, for a uniform status for refugees or for persons eligible for subsidiary protection, and for the content of the protection granted (“the Qualification Directive”) provide:
“...
(f) ‘person eligible for subsidiary protection’ means a third-country national or a stateless person who does not qualify as a refugee but in respect of whom substantial grounds have been shown for believing that the person concerned, if returned to his or her country of origin, or in the case of a stateless person, to his or her country of former habitual residence, would face a real risk of suffering serious harm as defined in Article 15, and to whom Article 17(1) and (2) does not apply, and is unable, or, owing to such risk, unwilling to avail himself or herself of the protection of that country; ...”
“Serious harm consists of:
(a) the death penalty or execution; or
(b) torture or inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment of an applicant in the country of origin; or
(c) serious and individual threat to a civilian’s life or person by reason of indiscriminate violence in situations of international or internal armed conflict.”
“1. Member States shall respect the principle of non-refoulement in accordance with their international obligations ...”
Regulation (EU) No. 604/2013 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 26 June 2013 (“the Dublin Regulation”) establishes the criteria and mechanisms for determining the member State responsible for examining an application for international protection lodged in one of the member States by a third-country national or a stateless person.
Its Chapter III sets out the rules of establishing the member State responsible for examining asylum applications submitted by the following categories of individuals: unaccompanied minors; those whose family members have been granted or have applied for international protection in a member State; those who have a valid visa or a residence permit in a member State; those who have irregularly crossed the border into a member State; those for whom the requirement to have a visa has been waived in a member State; and those who have applied for international protection in an international transit area of an airport.
Article 3 § 2 provides that where no member State responsible can be designated on the basis of the criteria set out in Chapter III, the first member State in which the application for international protection was lodged shall be responsible for examining it.
The relevant parts of Directive 2013/32/EU of the European Parliament and of the Council of 26 June 2013 on common procedures for granting and withdrawing international protection (“the Asylum Procedures Directive”) provide:
“1. When a person makes an application for international protection to an authority competent under national law for registering such applications, the registration shall take place no later than three working days after the application is made.
If the application for international protection is made to other authorities which are likely to receive such applications, but not competent for the registration under national law, Member States shall ensure that the registration shall take place no later than six working days after the application is made.
Member States shall ensure that those other authorities which are likely to receive applications for international protection such as the police, border guards, immigration authorities and personnel of detention facilities have the relevant information and that their personnel receive the necessary level of training which is appropriate to their tasks and responsibilities and instructions to inform applicants as to where and how applications for international protection may be lodged ...”
“1. Where there are indications that third-country nationals or stateless persons held in detention facilities or present at border crossing points, including transit zones, at external borders, may wish to make an application for international protection, Member States shall provide them with information on the possibility to do so. In those detention facilities and crossing points, Member States shall make arrangements for interpretation to the extent necessary to facilitate access to the asylum procedure.
Member States shall ensure that organisations and persons providing advice and counselling to applicants have effective access to applicants present at border crossing points, including transit zones, at external borders. Member States may provide for rules covering the presence of such organisations and persons in those crossing points and in particular that access is subject to an agreement with the competent authorities of the Member States. Limits on such access may be imposed only where, by virtue of national law, they are objectively necessary for the security, public order or administrative management of the crossing points concerned, provided that access is not thereby severely restricted or rendered impossible ...”
In its annual report on the state of the world’s human rights in 2017, Amnesty International stated:
“Reports continued of serious human rights violations, including enforced disappearance, unlawful detention, torture and other ill-treatment of detainees, and extrajudicial executions in the North Caucasus. The situation in Chechnya was further deteriorating. Impunity remained for past violent incidents against human rights defenders in Chechnya.
...
Novaya Gazeta reported the unlawful detention of dozens of people, starting in December 2016, and secret execution of at least 27 captives by the security forces on 26 January. No one was known to have been investigated or held accountable for these incidents by the end of the year.”
In its annual report on the human rights situation in 2017, Human Rights Watch stated:
“Early in 2017, Chechen security officials illegally detained and tortured presumed jihadists. Novaya Gazeta reported that in December 2016 and January 2017, Chechen police extrajudicially killed 27 detainees; Human Rights Center Memorial stated that, based on their investigation, 23 of the people on Novaya Gazeta’s list disappeared and two died following abduction-style detentions by local security officials.”
In its report entitled “Russian Federation – State actors of protection”, finalised in December 2016 and published in March 2017, the European Asylum Support Office (EASO) stated (footnotes omitted):
“...
HRW reported that the Chechen government has engaged in a campaign to stifle any opposition to Kadyrov, through physical attacks, unlawful detention, disappearances, and harassment. These violations intensified at the end of 2015 after the population became more critical of its leadership in the wake of a drop in oil prices and the floundering economy. According to HRW, ‘residents of Chechnya who show dissatisfaction with or seem reluctant to applaud the Chechen leadership and its policies are the primary victims of this crackdown’.
...
According to several sources, authorities actively threaten persons who assert their rights against the government or influential persons. The Danish Immigration Service learned from Memorial that ‘people are deterred from filing complaints’ with the European Court of Human Rights, and their lawyers are threatened.
...
... HRW mentions under‐reporting of cases of abuse against local critics as abuses may never be reported due to the overwhelming climate of fear, and residents ‘have been largely intimidated into silence’. Several sources told Landinfo that they will not go public with information where the family fears repercussions. The tools of the government to subdue victims of human rights violations into silence are manifold: reports mention death threats, threats to rape female relatives, denunciation as prostitute or drug addict, fabricated charges and physical assault ...
...
According to several sources, ill‐treatment to force confessions is commonplace in Chechnya. The Rapporteur of the Committee on Legal Affairs and Human Rights of the Parliamentary Assembly of the Council of Europe stated in June 2016 that he ‘was informed throughout [his] mandate [...] that policemen still routinely apply torture in order to obtain confessions, which remain the principle basis of guilty verdicts by courts’.
... According to Memorial quoted in a DIS report, police and investigators will make sure no evidence of beating is left on the body once the suspect has seen by a judge, either by using methods of ill‐treatment that leave no traces or by delaying presentation of an accused to his or her lawyer and the court. They also threaten doctors not to record any signs of ill‐treatment in their medical reports.”
In its annual report on the state of the world’s human rights in 2017, Amnesty International stated that Belarus lacked a functioning asylum system and repeatedly handed over individuals seeking international protection to the authorities of countries where they were at real risk of torture or other ill-treatment.
In its annual report on the human rights situation in 2017, Human Rights Watch stated:
“Belarus failed to provide meaningful protection to hundreds of asylum seekers, mostly from the Russian republic of Chechnya, who arrived in Belarus with the aim of crossing the border into Poland and requesting asylum. Belarus lacks a functioning asylum system. During 2017 it returned at least two asylum seekers from Chechnya back to Russia, which authorities view as a safe country of origin, putting them at grave risk of ill-treatment.”
There is surely no more burning issue in European politics today than the refoulement of migrants at land borders or in transit zones and the resulting State liability for human-rights breaches during immigration and border-control operations. Until now, the European Court of Human Rights (“the Court”) has remained faithful to its role as guarantor of Convention rights in this regard and the present judgment has the merit of reinforcing this role in a case concerning the collective denial of access to the territory of the Lithuanian State, at its land borders, to a family of seven Russian nationals. Hence, I agree with the majority that there has been a violation of Article 3 of the European Convention on Human Rights (“the Convention”), due to the refusal of entry without an examination of the individual situation of the applicants, which resulted in the real risk of a return to Chechnya and ill-treatment there, as well as of Article 13 due to the lack of an effective remedy, namely a remedy with automatic suspensive effect.
Nonetheless, I would like to take this opportunity to complement the reflexions already developed in my concurring opinions in Hirsi Jamaa and Others v. Italy and De Souza Ribeiro v. France, in view of the current attacks on this case-law being waged by certain Governments and political parties. For that purpose, I will expand on the respondent State’s exercise of jurisdiction at its land borders and its obligation to protect the Convention rights of those asylum-seekers who come under its jurisdiction, and, in particular, asylum-seekers’ right of access to the international protection procedure.
It is the case-law of the Court that the exercise of jurisdiction is a condition sine qua non for engaging the responsibility of the State. In Hirsi Jamaa and Others, the Court reiterated that, “[w]henever the State through its agents ... exercises control and authority over an individual, and thus jurisdiction, the State is under an obligation under Article 1 to secure to that individual the rights and freedoms under Section I of the Convention that are relevant to the situation of that individual”. The Court concluded that in the period between boarding the ships of the Italian armed forces and being handed over to the Libyan authorities, the applicants were under the continuous and exclusive de jure and de facto control of the Italian authorities. Remarkably, the Court considered that Italy could not circumvent its jurisdiction under the Convention by describing the events in issue as rescue operations on the high seas. To be clearer, the Hirsi Jamaa and Others case-law to the effect that Article 4 of Protocol No. 4 is not limited to territorial removal, but also includes the extraterritorial removal of migrants, aims at closing any gap in protection: for the Court there is no “area outside the law where individuals are covered by no legal system capable of affording them enjoyment of the rights and guarantees protected by the Convention which the States have undertaken to secure to everyone within their jurisdiction.”
If the removal of aliens on the high seas in the circumstances of the Hirsi Jamaa and Others case constitutes an exercise of jurisdiction, a fortiori the non-admission or rejection of migrants at the land border also constitutes such exercise of jurisdiction. To put it differently, the Convention and its Protocols apply to migrants who (lawfully or unlawfully) have crossed a borderline, since territorial jurisdiction starts at the borderline and there is no reduction or waiver of a State’s jurisdiction depending on any physical border. Any other interpretation, which would limit jurisdiction by artificially moving the border inwards and creating a gap in protection, would breach the obligation to interpret the Convention and its additional protocols in good faith, in the light of their object and purpose and in accordance with the principle of effectiveness. As I have argued elsewhere, the “excision” of a part of a State’s territory from the migration zone in order to avoid the application of general legal guarantees to people arriving in that part of the “excised” territory represents a blatant circumvention of a State’s obligations under international law. This was precisely the issue again in N.D. and N.T v. Spain.
In N.D. and N.T. v. Spain, the Court rightly persevered in the footsteps of the Hirsi and Jamaa and Others case-law, by highlighting that, “where there is control over another this is de jure control exercised by the State in question over the individuals concerned ..., that is to say, effective control by the authorities of that State whether those authorities are inside the State’s territory or on its land borders”. For that reason, the Court flatly rejected the respondent Government’s view that, even supposing that “the border fence were inside Spain’s land borders”, the actions of the law‑enforcement authorities in apprehending the applicants, handcuffing them and sending them back to Morocco did not come within Spain’s jurisdiction for the purposes of Article 4 of Protocol No. 4. The crucial point for the Court was that Spanish jurisdiction is also exercised on the land between the fences at the Melilla border crossing, and not just beyond the protective structures of that crossing. From the point at which the applicants climbed down from the border fences they were under the continuous and exclusive control, at least de facto, of the Spanish authorities. This confirms my view that “immigration and border control is a primary State function and all forms of this control result in the exercise of the State’s jurisdiction”.
The acknowledgement of the State’s exercise of jurisdiction at its borders is all the more important in that it makes it possible to consider fully the relationship between human rights and refugee law and more precisely to ensure the respect of the principle of non-refoulement, which constitutes the “cornerstone of international refugee protection”.
Indeed, the very definition of the French term “refoulement”, such as endorsed by Gerard Cornu – who states that it is a “mesure par laquelle un État interdit le franchissement de sa frontière à un étranger qui sollicite l’accès à son territoire” – as well as by Denis Alland and Catherine Teitgen-Colly – according to whom this notion means both “l’éloignement du territoire” and “la non-admission à l’entrée” – warrants the inclusion of border checks within the scope of the jurisdiction of States Parties. Besides, the principle of non-refoulement would be purely fictional if the State could prevent the application of the principle by means of push-back policies or non-admission or rejection at the border. In this sense, the UNHCR Executive Committee clearly emphasised the “fundamental importance of the observance of the principle of non-refoulement - both at the border and within the territory of a State of persons who may be subjected to persecution if returned to their country of origin irrespective of whether or not they have been formally recognized as refugees”. This principle of international refugee law has also been enshrined in European Union law, and recognized by the Parliamentary Assembly and Committee of Ministers of the Council of Europe, and by the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights.
In its Report on the Human Rights Situation of Refugees and Migrant Families and Unaccompanied Children in the United States of America (2015), the Inter-American Commission has specifically stated that a State’s jurisdiction “include[s] its international borders or any place a State executes border governance actions”. That is, all border governance actions are within the State’s jurisdiction, with a strong presumption of the State’s effective control at its borders. Such an interpretation was also advocated by the UN Special Rapporteur on Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment, when he stated that “it is essential to ensure that there is no vacuum of human rights protection that is due to inappropriate and artificial limits on territorial jurisdiction”. In this regard, one should always recall that, “from the perspective of people applying for protection, the content given to non-refoulement can be a question of life and death”.
In the present case, the respondent State did not dispute that it had exercised jurisdiction at its borders when the State Border Guard service issued decisions on refusal of entry in respect of the applicants on 16 April 2017 and returned them to Belarus; issued new decisions on refusal of entry in their respect on 11 May 2007, detaining the applicants at the border checkpoint for several hours and returning them to Belarus; and issued again new decisions on refusal of entry in respect of the applicants on 22 May 2007, detaining them at the border checkpoint overnight and returning them to Belarus. In view of these facts, the applicants were undeniably under the effective control of the Lithuanian border officials. Thus, I fully agree with the majority, which state that it is “evident that the actions complained of by the applicants were imputable to Lithuania”.
In other words, the approach adopted by the Chamber in the present case avoids a situation in which the Lithuanian State circumvents its jurisdiction and thus escapes its obligations under the Convention. Such an interpretation of the notion of a State’s jurisdiction is indeed not only the necessary prerequisite to ensure the effective access of the applicants to international protection, but also and more broadly guarantees the effective protection of their fundamental rights and consequently makes it possible to avoid a situation in which the Lithuanian State’s borders become a “no man’s land”. It is indeed essential that “all forms of immigration and border control of a State party to the European Convention on Human Rights are subject to the human rights standard established in it and the scrutiny of the Court”.
In Hirsi Jamaa and Others, the Italian Government submitted that Article 4 of Protocol No. 4 was not applicable to that case, since the guarantee provided by the above provision came into play only in the event of expulsion of persons who were on the territory of a State or who had crossed the national border illegally and, in the relevant case, the measure in issue was a refusal to authorise entry to national territory rather than “expulsion”. The applicants argued that such a prohibition should also apply to measures to push back migrants on the high seas, carried out without any preliminary formal decision, in so far as such measures could constitute “hidden expulsions”. A teleological and “extraterritorial” interpretation of that provision would render it practical and effective rather than theoretical and illusory.
The Court defined the legal issues at stake as follows: “[T]he Court must, for the first time, examine whether Article 4 of Protocol No. 4 applies to a case involving the removal of aliens to a third State carried out outside national territory.” To this question, the Court gave a straightforward answer: “the wording of Article 4 of Protocol No. 4 does not in itself pose an obstacle to its extraterritorial application. It must be noted that Article 4 of Protocol No. 4 contains no reference to the notion of ‘territory’.” Furthermore, the Court added that “according to the drafters of Protocol No. 4, the word ‘expulsion’ should be interpreted ‘“in the generic meaning, in current use (to drive away from a place)’.” Most importantly, a purposeful interpretation of the said provision, in the light of the principle of effectiveness, implies that,
“If, therefore, Article 4 of Protocol No. 4 were to apply only to collective expulsions from the national territory of the States Parties to the Convention, a significant component of contemporary migratory patterns would not fall within the ambit of that provision, notwithstanding the fact that the conduct it is intended to prohibit can occur outside national territory and in particular, as in the instant case, on the high seas. Article 4 would thus be ineffective in practice with regard to such situations, which, however, are on the increase. The consequence of that would be that migrants having taken to the sea, often risking their lives, and not having managed to reach the borders of a State, would not be entitled to an examination of their personal circumstances before being expelled, unlike those travelling by land.”
Hence, the removal of aliens carried out in the context of interceptions on the high seas by the authorities of a State in the exercise of their sovereign authority, the effect of which is to prevent migrants from reaching the borders of the State or even to push them back to another State, constitutes an exercise of jurisdiction within the meaning of Article 1 of the Convention which engages the responsibility of the State in question under Article 4 of Protocol No. 4. Consequently, the Court found a violation of Article 4 of Protocol No. 4, since “the removal of the applicants was of a collective nature”. Drawing all the consequences from this reasoning, it is legitimate to state that
“The purpose of the provision (Article 4 of Protocol No. 4) is to guarantee the right to lodge a claim for asylum which will be individually evaluated, regardless of how the asylum-seeker reached the country concerned, be it by land, sea or air, be it legally or illegally. Thus, the spirit of the provision requires a similarly broad interpretation of the notion of collective expulsion which includes any collective operation of extradition, removal, informal transfer, “rendition”, rejection, refusal of admission and any other collective measure which would have the effect of compelling an asylum-seeker to remain in the country of origin, wherever that operation takes place.”
In spite of the unanimous finding of the Grand Chamber in Hirsi Jamaa and Others on the broad meaning of “expulsion” for the purposes of Article 4 of Protocol No. 4, some States continued to ignore, and occasionally impugn, this case-law. In N.D. and N.T., the respondent Government argued that Article 4 of Protocol No. 4 to the Convention was not applicable to that case. In their submission, the facts of the case did not amount to a “collective expulsion of aliens”, just as the Italian Government had maintained in Hirsi Jamaa and Others and again in Sharifi and Others. Since the applicants had not succeeded in getting past the land border protection structures of three successive fences, the Spanish Government argued that they had not entered Spanish territory and that the conduct of the police forces was aimed only at lending them assistance to climb down from the third fence. This was exactly the same line of reasoning as that used by the Italian Government, which claimed to have been assisting people on the high seas while boarding them onto Italian vessels in the Mediterranean and taking them to Africa.
In the Spanish case, the Court used a logically impeccable a fortiori argument to counter the Government’s position: “Given that even interceptions on the high seas come within the ambit of Article 4 of Protocol No. 4 (see Hirsi Jamaa and Others, cited above), the same must also apply to the allegedly lawful refusal of entry to the national territory of persons arriving in Spain illegally.” Since the applicants were removed and returned to Morocco against their wishes, this clearly amounted to an “expulsion” within the meaning of Article 4 of Protocol No. 4. That expulsion was also a “collective” one, in that the number of aliens made subject to such decisions is irrelevant, the important question being whether there had been an individual assessment of each migrant’s claims. In N.D. and N.T., there had been no such individual assessment of the applicants’ claims. Furthermore, the Court noted that the applicants were turned back immediately by the border authorities and had no access to an interpreter or to any official who could provide them with the minimum amount of information required with regard to the right of asylum and/or the relevant procedure for appealing against their expulsion. No requirement was made regarding the national, racial, ethnic, religious or otherwise homogeneity of the members of the group targeted by the expulsion. In view of the “immediate nature of their de facto expulsion”, the Court found that there had been a violation of Article 13 of the Convention taken in conjunction with Article 4 of Protocol No. 4.
In view of the present adverse political climate in respect of asylum-seekers and migrants in general and towards African migrants arriving in Europe in particular, and of the attendant mounting pressure on the Court on the part of some Governments, the Court’s firmness in the Melilla case must be emphasised. The Court did not abandon its principled position on the purposeful interpretation of the concept of “expulsion” for the purposes of Article 4 of Protocol No. 4, which includes any “immediate ... de facto expulsion”, or to use the words of the drafters of Protocol No. 4, any form of driving a person away from a place, such as non-admission, rejection and return of migrants at the land border. With regard to the respondent Government’s arguments concerning Spain’s duty as a sovereign State to protect its borders against attempts to enter the country unlawfully, it should be recalled that the Court has already stated that problems with managing migratory flows or with the reception of asylum-seekers could not justify having recourse to practices that were incompatible with States’ obligations under the Convention.
The fact that migrants attempted to enter Spanish territory unlawfully by crossing a land border is irrelevant, since the applicability of Article 4 of Protocol No. 4 is not conditional on the lawful entry of migrants into State territory. It is obvious that the Chamber decision did not legitimise the unlawful conduct of migrants climbing over three consecutive fences, let alone find that maintaining a system of border protection at unauthorised crossing points, as in Melilla case, constituted a human-rights violation. The Court merely decided, and did so in perfect coherence with the Hirsi Jamaa and Others judgment, that when migrants come under the Contracting Parties’ jurisdiction, as they did when they were apprehended, handcuffed and returned by the Guardia Civil, they have a right not to be removed or, to use again the words of the drafters of Protocol No. 4, not to be “driven away” without an individual assessment of their claims. The Chamber certainly did not decide that migrants have a right to enter at any point along the border without undergoing checks. Hence, the Spanish Government’s argument that a finding for the applicants would create an undesirable “suction effect” and result in a migration crisis with devastating consequences for human-rights protection was a pure ad terrorem fallacy, with no legal value. This kind of argument, using extraordinary migratory pressure as an excuse for human-rights-unfriendly policy choices, was already made in the De Souza Ribeiro v. France case and was duly rejected by the Court. In this regard, it is highly relevant that, in the framework of the Working Group on the Universal Periodic Review, the Austrian Government and other like-minded Governments have asked Spain to review the current deportation practices for migrants in Ceuta and Melilla, and also the proposed amendment of Spain’s national security law to ensure the right of an individual to seek asylum.
If the Court flatly rejected the Italian Government submission to the effect that there was a logical obstacle to the applicability of Article 4 of Protocol No. 4 in Hirsi Jamaa and Others, namely the fact that the applicants were not on Italian territory at the time of their transfer to Libya so that that measure, in the Government’s view, could not be considered to be an “expulsion” within the ordinary meaning of the term, the Court must also today accept that the meaning of “collective expulsion” includes a fortiori any form of removal at, around, along, or in connection with border barriers and, evidently, any form of removal from international zones or transit zones or areas otherwise “excised” for immigration purposes under the respondent State jurisdiction. This also includes the practice of rejecting persons at the border, the so-called “hot expulsions” or “expulsions in caliente” as is the case in Melilla, which has been criticised by the Committee against Torture, the Human Rights Committee, the Committee for the Elimination of Discrimination against Women and the Special Rapporteur on the Human Rights of Migrants. To pretend that Article 4 of Protocol No. 4 does not encompass non-admission or rejection at the border would not only depart from the unanimous and recent findings in Hirsi and Others and Sharifi and Others, but would also represent a severe breach of the principle of interpretation of the Convention and its Additional Protocols in good faith, in the light of their object and purpose and in accordance with the principle of effectiveness.
Contracting Parties to the Convention have the right to control the entry, residence and expulsion of aliens, subject to their customary and treaty obligations. In the system of human-rights protection established by the Convention, “States’ legitimate concern to foil the increasingly frequent attempts to circumvent immigration restrictions must not deprive asylum-seekers of the protection afforded by [the European Convention on Human Rights and the Geneva Convention]”. Under this perspective, the following two principles are to be retained in the Court’s case-law on border control. On the one hand, it is indisputable that no person under the authority and control of a State, regardless of the circumstances, is devoid of legal protection for his or her fundamental and non-derogable human rights”. On the other hand, “States shall respect, promote and fulfil human rights wherever they exercise jurisdiction or effective control, including where they exercise authority or control extraterritorially” and, to be more precise, “States shall ensure that all border governance measures taken at international borders, including those aimed at addressing irregular migration ..., are in accordance with the principle of non-refoulement and the prohibition of arbitrary and collective expulsions. Therefore, “State jurisdiction over immigration and border control naturally implies State liability for any human rights violations occurring during the performance of this control”. In other words, recognition of a State’s jurisdiction at its borders goes hand-in-hand with the applicability of human-rights treaties, which includes “affirmative measures to guarantee that individuals subject to their jurisdiction can exercise and enjoy [their] rights”. The acknowledgment of the applicability of the principle of non-refoulement and, more broadly, human rights at a State’s borders, is recognised at the European and international level.
This approach has been confirmed by the Inter-American Court of Human Rights as well as, at European level, within the European Union law and in the Court’s own case-law. For instance, the Court of Justice held, in Zakaria, that “it must be noted that border guards performing their duties, within the meaning of Article 6 of Regulation No. 562/2006 [Schengen Borders Code], are required, inter alia, to fully respect human dignity” (§ 40) and the ECJ further added that if a situation “is not governed by European Union law, it must [be] examine[d] ... in the light of national law, taking into account also the European Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms ... to which all the Member States are party”. Indeed, State obligations in this context include specific obligations for border guards, which are a constituent part of the common asylum policy.
In the case at hand, the decisions on refusal to entry concerned seven people, the first applicant, his wife and their five children. They benefited from the full array of human rights protected by the Convention and the Additional Protocols. Had the applicants complained of a violation of Article 4 of Protocol No. 4, a finding of a violation would have been inevitable, because their situation was not individually assessed by the domestic authorities. In addition, when there is “a real risk” for the individuals involved “of being subjected to torture or inhumane or degrading treatment or punishment in the receiving country ..., Article 3 implies an obligation not to expel the individual to that country”. Thus, States have a fundamental obligation to “ensure that no one shall be subjected to refusal of admission at the frontier, rejection, expulsion or any other measure which would have the result of compelling him to return to, or remain in, a territory where he would be in danger of persecution for reasons of race, religion, nationality, membership of a particular social group or political opinion”. To prevent such a risk of irreparable harm from materialising, the State has indeed to assess not only “the situation in the receiving country”, but also the individual situation of the person seeking asylum. Therefore, it is particularly important that the prohibition of refoulement is applicable to any form of non-admission at borders and that the effective protection of the asylum-seeker’s rights is ensured. To this end, such individuals must be allowed, already at the border, effective access to the international protection procedure.
At a time when many Governments have stepped up their punitive approach towards migrants from sub-Saharan Africa, including registered asylum-seekers, the UNHCR recently stated that “[t]he principle of non-refoulement ... requires, as a general rule, that States grant individuals seeking international protection access to the territory and fair and efficient asylum procedures ...”. As long as the State has not performed an effective review which takes into account the personal circumstances of each migrant, the concerned individual can neither be removed, expelled or extradited, nor be the subject of a refusal of entry to the State’s territory.
This approach has been confirmed by the Recommended principles and Guidelines on Human Rights and international borders, issued by the UN High Commissioner for Human Rights, by European Union law as well as by the Court’s own case-law. As stated in the Grand Chamber judgment in F.G. v. Sweden, there are several specific obligations incumbent on States in respect of the procedural aspects of Articles 2 and 3 of the Convention. These imply the assessment of risk, that is, an examination of the general situation in the destination country and of the particular circumstances of the applicant’s situation.
In accordance with the principle of effectiveness, it would be inconceivable that the Court ensures these procedural guarantees without first protecting “that which alone makes it in fact possible to benefit from such guarantees”, namely access to the procedure. Considering that, by definition, the materialisation of a risk of irreparable harm leads to a situation that the State can no longer rectify, it is essential to ensure access to the asylum procedure. In order to do so, the States must firstly provide education and raise awareness among border-control authorities, since the fact that the persons concerned did not expressly apply for asylum does not relieve the State of its obligations under Article 3 of the Convention. The border-control authorities should be able to identify an asylum request as such and subsequently to act according to their function, which involves relevant language skills. Furthermore, the State should ensure that asylum-seekers are guaranteed access to interpreters. Finally, the Court as well as the Court of Justice not only require that every asylum-seeker be entitled to appeal against a decision refusing international protection, but also that, where a return decision is issued, such a remedy must have an automatic suspensive effect.
In the present case, the central question was whether “the Lithuanian authorities carried out an adequate assessment of the applicants’ claim that they would” face a real risk of ill-treatment. I share the majority conclusion that the Lithuanian border guards did not meet the procedural obligations arising under the Convention. Furthermore, the situation is all the more serious in that it involves a family with five very young children, that is, applicants belonging to one of the most vulnerable groups. The domestic authorities not only failed to take into account that “the applicant’s status as an asylum-seeker and, as such, a member of a particularly underprivileged and vulnerable population group in need of special protection”. As a matter of principle, immigrants are “the most vulnerable to potential or actual violations of their human rights”. Worse still, they failed to consider the situation of the applicants’ children in the light of the principle according to which “the child’s extreme vulnerability is the decisive factor and takes precedence over considerations relating to the status of illegal immigrant”.
In the wake of a new and dangerous “post-international law” world, this opinion is a plea for building bridges, not walls, for the bridges required by those in need of international protection, not walls arising from the fear that has been percolating in recent years through global sewers of hatred. Although justified as an attempt to curb illegal immigration, human trafficking or smuggling, these physical barriers reflect an ill-minded isolationist policy and represent, as a matter of fact, the prevailing malign political Weltanschauung in some corners of the world, which perceives migrants as a cultural and social threat that must be countered by whatever means necessary and views all asylum claims as baseless fantasies on the part of people conniving to bring chaos to the Western world. The culture of fear, with its delirious ruminations against “cosmopolitan elites” and “foreign” multiculturalism, and its most noxious rhetoric in favour of “our way of life” and “identity politics”, has burst into the mainstream.
In order to remain the “conscience of Europe”, the Court must ensure the effective protection of migrants and especially of asylum-seekers, which requires scrutiny of States’ actions at their land borders and, more specifically, the guarantee of a right of access to international protection procedure. Land borders are not zones of exclusion or exception from States’ human-rights obligations, and this observation also applies to the intermediate zones between border fences and to transit zones. Jurisdiction under both refugee and human-rights law is presumed to be exercised within a State’s territory, including its land borders, international zones, transit zones or areas that are otherwise excised for immigration purposes.
Furthermore, the Court must resist two temptations, regardless of how insistently it has been and will continue to be lured towards them. Denying jurisdiction when migrants are de facto and de iure in the hands and at the mercy of border-control authorities, when, for example, they are netted, apprehended, handcuffed or detained in order to be returned, would be a blatant circumvention of the legal force of the Convention and its Additional Protocols, by means of the fraudulent creation of an intolerable legal vacuum at the border of the Contracting Parties.
Accepting jurisdiction at the border, but rejecting the principle that migrants who come under the Contracting Parties’ jurisdiction have the right not to be returned or removed without an individual evaluation of each migrant’s claim, would be a hypocritical, self-defeating interpretation of the Convention and its Additional Protocols. To allow people to be rejected at land borders and returned without assessing their individual claims amounts to treating them like animals. Migrants are not cattle that can be driven away like this.
Neither of these two options – denial of jurisdiction or of the right to an individual assessment of each migrant’s claims, and non-admission or rejection at the border through a restrictive interpretation of “expulsion” as not including non-admission or rejection at the border, the so-called “hot expulsions” or “expulsions in caliente” – would honour the Court. As the present judgment accepted neither option, and instead remained faithful to the unanimous and recent findings of Hirsi Jamaa and Others and Sharifi and Others, it deserves to be commended.
With due respect to our colleagues, we unfortunately cannot agree with the majority that there has been a violation of Articles 3 and 13 of the Convention.
It is undisputed that in the present case, the applicants presented themselves at different border points between Belarus and Lithuania on three occasions and that on all three occasions they were refused entry to the territory of Lithuania. The parties are in dispute as to whether the applicants, as they affirm, presented an asylum request or, as the Government hold, they did not present such a request and simply tried to enter Lithuanian territory. As a matter of fact, the impugned decisions did not consider them as asylum-seekers.
As far as we understand the Lithuanian legal system, the law distinguishes between ordinary entry to the territory and a request for asylum.
In the event of entry without an asylum request, the competent border authorities – the SBGS – are empowered and obliged to check whether the alien has a valid visa or residence permit. In the event of refusal of entry, the alien has the right to appeal the decision before the administrative courts. Whereas during the period allowed for appeal aliens have the right to remain on the territory of Lithuania, the appeal in itself is not suspensive but the competent court can confer such effect on its decision (see paragraphs 37 and 38 of the judgment).
Where an asylum request is lodged, the decision as to whether to allow the asylum-seeker to enter Lithuania is taken by the Migration Department. Refusal decisions can be appealed against, and during the time allowed for lodging such an appeal and, moreover, during the appeal itself, asylum-seekers are entitled to remain at the border checkpoint (ibid.).
In the present case, the applicants did not lodge an appeal against the decisions, which, considering them as “ordinary” aliens seeking entry to Lithuania who had failed to present the necessary documents, refused them entry to the territory. They considered that, since such an appeal did not have an automatic suspensive effect, it could not be considered an effective remedy preventing them from being returned to the country they had come from and, eventually, their country of origin, with the risk of ill-treatment.
It seems undisputable that if the applicants were “ordinary” aliens seeking entry, the remedy available under Lithuanian law did not fall short of the Convention requirements, as the Contracting States have the right, as a matter of well-established international law and subject to their treaty obligations, including the Convention, to control the entry, residence and expulsion of aliens (see, for example, F.G. v. Sweden [GC], no. 43611/11, ECHR 2016, and Üner v. the Netherlands [GC], no. 46410/99, ECHR 2006XII) and, in consequence, the provision and mechanism of remedies in the event of refusal of entry remain in the discretion of the domestic authorities.
The question remains whether in the case of an alleged risk of ill-treatment the available domestic remedies were effective. In the event of a request for asylum, be it oral or in writing, pursuant to Lithuanian law the decision on whether to examine an asylum application on the merits is taken by the Migration Department within forty-eight hours of the submission of such an application. Although it is not expressly stated in the judgment, we infer from paragraph 28 that until such time as a preliminary decision is taken, the alien will remain at a border check-point or in a transit zone. If the asylum-seeker’s request has been rejected, he or she can appeal and during the period for lodging an appeal and while the appeal is pending, he or she cannot be removed from Lithuanian territory (see point 3 above).
In that context, it is noteworthy that the present judgment relies on the Court’s case-law concerning remedies against decisions of removal from a contracting State to a country where there is a risk of ill-treatment, which are considered effective only when they have automatic suspensive effect (see paragraph 83 of the judgment). In such cases indeed, the Contracting States are bound by the requirements, both substantive and procedural, stemming from Articles 2 and 3 of the Convention and must ensure that an applicant’s request is duly examined before he or she is removed from their territory. In the judgments in M.S.S. v. Belgium and Greece [GC], no. 30696/09, ECHR 2011, and L.M. and Others v. Russia, nos. 40081/14 and 2 others, 15 October 2015, the Court examined situations where the applicants had entered the territory of the respective respondent States but had later been the subject of expulsion orders. In the present case, the applicants were refused entry to Lithuanian territory. The Convention system makes a clear distinction between expulsion and the right to enter a territory (compare the first and second paragraphs of Article 3 of Protocol No. 4 to the Convention). While the right of entry is reserved for the nationals of each High Contracting Party (see Article 3 § 2 of Protocol No. 4), there are a number of Convention guarantees applicable in the area of expulsion of aliens, either expressly provided for by the Convention (see Article 4 of Protocol No. 4) or developed through the case-law of the Court. The distinction between “expulsion” on one hand and “refusal of entry” or “non-admission” on the other is also well-grounded in international law, according to which the term “expulsion” applies only to aliens present on a territory of or inside a returning State. For example, Article 2 of the International Law Commission’s Draft Articles on the Expulsion of Aliens distinguishes between “expulsion” and “nonadmission”. The term “expulsion”, used in this sense, does not encompass rejection at the border or other refusal to allow entry to the national territory.
In the absence of well-established case-law or at least unequivocal authorities in the Court’s case-law governing situations such as that in the present case, we believe that the present judgment should have taken a clear position as to what are the precise Article-3 obligations of the authorities in situations where an alien presents himself or herself at a border and submits a claim for asylum, including the prima facie assessment to be made, the legal status of the alien during this period and the decisions – refusal of entry or removal from territory – that can be taken if the authorities deem that the asylum-seeker did not have, at least, an arguable claim that – either in the country of origin or in the country where he or she risks refoulement (a question which also deserved a cumulative, alternative or exclusive answer by the Chamber) – there would be a risk of ill-treatment.
Be that as it may, apart from the issue of non-exhaustion of an effective legal remedy and the lacunas in the assessment of the authorities’ legal obligations once an alien presents himself or herself at the border claiming asylum, we cannot agree with the factual assumptions underlying the majority’s decision. It must be underlined that it has not even been established by the Court that the applicants ever submitted a claim to the authorities of the respondent State alleging that, in the event of refusal to grant entry, they would run the risk of being returned to Russia, where in turn they would face the risk of ill-treatment. Furthermore, it appears that the applicants themselves do not assert that they have ever presented such a claim to the Lithuanian authorities.
In respect of the applicants’ attempt to enter the territory of the respondent State on 11 May 2017, they did not provide the border authorities with any reasons whatsoever as to why they thought they were entitled to enter.
Previously, on 16 April 2017 the applicants had written the word “azul” (which, according to the applicants, was commonly used by asylum-seekers from Chechnya) in Cyrillic script on the decisions refusing them entry, at the place indicated for and instead of their signatures. We believe that in the absence of any other indications, and taking into account the fact that the Russian language and the Cyrillic script are not in official or even widespread use in Lithuania, the border guards cannot be expected to master colloquial terms from a region within a third country. Given that the applicants’ surnames begin with the letter A, the border authorities had no reason to doubt that the word written by the applicants was not their signature.
In respect of the applicants’ attempt of 22 May 2017, they assert that they submitted a written asylum application in the Russian language and in Cyrillic script to the Lithuanian authorities. They provided the Court with a photograph of that application, together with the train tickets, which they claim was taken at the premises of the border checkpoint. However, the photograph shows nothing conclusive apart from the train tickets and the application. It cannot be regarded as evidence that the request was actually remitted to the authorities. In sum, similarly to the situation of 16 April 2017, there is no indication that the applicants actually presented any claim to the Lithuanian authorities referring to the risk of ill-treatment in the event of refusal of entry.
According to the Court’s well-established case-law, where an applicant claims that a Contracting State has violated its obligations under Articles 2 or 3, he or she must unequivocally establish that there was a claim that in the event of return to the country of origin or a third country, there was a real risk of ill-treatment, thus putting the domestic authorities in a position to comply with their Convention obligations (see F.G. v. Sweden, cited above, § 125).
The majority, apart from conferring decisive importance on the word “azul” apposed in lieu of their signatures in the decisions on refusal of entry, omitting any discussion of the consequences to be drawn when this word is apposed in a field reserved for signatures and the applicants’ names begin with the letter “A”, did not address the Government’s arguments, such as the applicants’ failure to make use of the available remedies – irrespective of their suspensive character – against such refusal decisions, in which they could have unequivocally raised the asylum issue and brought their request to the knowledge of the authorities, which could not then have disregarded their request. Moreover, the judgment itself refers to domestic case-law showing that, in cases where a genuine request for asylum was made, the competent authorities were ordered by the courts to allow the individuals concerned to enter Lithuanian territory (see paragraphs 48-50 of the judgment).
In short, it is our view that, in spite of a lack of any convincing evidence in this respect, the majority accepted an assumption that the applicants had applied for asylum at the Lithuanian border. Furthermore, the majority failed to address several fundamental questions pertaining to the interpretation of Article 3 of the Convention, namely whether the present situation is to be distinguished from the situation of expulsion and what precise obligations apply to it. This made it impossible for us to vote with the majority and to find a violation of Articles 3 and 13 of the Convention.