The case originated in an application (no. 21674/05) against the Republic of Azerbaijan lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by an Azerbaijani national, Ms Natalia Onufriyevna Rahimova (Nataliya Onufriyevna Rəhimova – “the applicant”), on 2 June 2005.
The applicant was represented by Ms S. Suleymanova, a lawyer practising in . The Azerbaijani Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Mr C. Asgarov.
The applicant alleged, in particular, that the civil proceedings in the domestic courts had failed to meet the requirement of “reasonable time” and that, as a result, her right to respect for her home and her property rights had been violated.
On 29 May 2006 the President of the Chamber decided to give notice of the application to the Government. Under the provisions of Article 29 § 3 of the Convention, the Court decided to examine the merits of the application at the same time as its admissibility.
Both the Government and the applicant failed to submit any observations on the admissibility and merits of the application within the time-limits specified by the Court. However, in her letter of 2 October 2007, the applicant indicated her intention to pursue the application on the basis of the materials available in the case file.
The applicant was born in 1949.
The applicant lived with her family in an apartment in . On 18 November 1999 her apartment was damaged by fire caused by the occupants of the neighbouring apartment. The neighbouring apartment was owned by A., a police officer. According to the applicant, her apartment became unfit to live in and she and her family had to move out and find temporary accommodation.
On 15 January 2001 the applicant brought an action against A., seeking monetary compensation of an amount equivalent to 10,000 US dollars for damage caused to her apartment. The Sabunchu District Court instituted civil proceedings.
It appears that for several years after this the Sabunchu District Court fixed dates for several hearings, all of which were postponed either due to the defendant’s failure to appear or for other unspecified reasons.
On 12 August and 29 September 2003 the applicant sent two similar letters to the President of the Sabunchu District Court, complaining of the court’s failure to conduct the proceedings in a timely manner.
On 23 June 2004 and 15 December 2004 the applicant complained to the Ministry of Justice and the Ombudsman about the Sabunchu District Court’s failure to examine her case.
On 16 February 2005 she wrote a letter addressed to the President, Chief Prosecutor, President of the Supreme Court, President of the Court of Appeal, Chairman of the Milli Majlis and other authorities, complaining about the length of proceedings in the first-instance court.
It is unclear whether the applicant received any replies to her letters.
In the meantime, on an unspecified date in August 2004 the Sabunchu District Court sought an expert opinion on the damage caused to the applicant’s apartment by the fire. On 27 August 2004 the expert issued an opinion, according to which the damage was estimated at 2,537,000 Azerbaijani manats (AZM).
On 31 January 2005 the Sabunchu District Court held a hearing and delivered its judgment, partially upholding the applicant’s claim and awarding her AZM 2,637,000. This amount included compensation for damage of the amount estimated by the expert, as well as compensation for court fees paid by the applicant. According to the applicant, she received the full text of the judgment on 31 May 2005.
The applicant lodged an appeal, claiming that the amount awarded was too low and did not reflect the actual damage caused. On 13 July 2005 the Court of Appeal upheld the first-instance court’s judgment. Following an appeal in cassation by the applicant, on 6 October 2005 the Supreme Court upheld the lower courts’ judgments.
In accordance with Article 172.1 of the Code of Civil Procedure of 2000, a court of first instance must examine a civil case and deliver a judgment within three months of the date the civil action is lodged with the court. Shorter examination periods are required for certain categories of cases (Articles 172.2 and 172.3).
Immediately after the conclusion of the last hearing of the case, the first-instance court must deliberate and deliver a judgment (Articles 213 and 214.1). The full text of the judgment must be drafted at this time and sent to the parties within three days (Articles 227.1 and 227.3).
In complex cases, the court may decide to deliver only the operative provisions of the judgment after the hearing (Article 214.3). In such an event, the parties and their representatives must be informed of the date when the full text of the judgment will be available (Article 214.4).
In exceptional circumstances where the case is particularly complex, the first-instance court may deliver either the full judgment or its operative provisions no later than three days after the end of the judicial examination of the case (Article 215). If only the operative provisions of the judgment have been delivered, the full text of the judgment must be drafted within the next ten days. The presiding judge must inform the parties of the date when the full text of the judgment will be available (Article 227.2).