.  The case originated in an application (no. 21566/13) against the Russian Federation lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Russian national, Mr Sergey Pavlovich Denisov (“the applicant”), on 11 March 2013.
The Russian Government (“the Government”) were represented by Mr G. Matyushkin, Representative of the Russian Federation at the European Court of Human Rights.
.  The applicant alleged, in particular, that he had not benefited from effective medical care whilst in detention, that he had not had effective avenues through which to complain about a violation of his right to proper medical services, and that his pre-trial detention had been unreasonably long.
.  On 1 October 2013 the complaints concerning the lack of adequate medical assistance and absence of effective avenues to complain thereof, as well as the complaint about the length of the applicant’s pre-trial detention, were communicated to the Government and the remainder of the application was declared inadmissible.
.  The applicant was born in 1971 and lives in Krasnoyarsk.
.  On 13 August 2012 the applicant was arrested on suspicion of having attempted to sell a large quantity of heroin. Two days later the Sverdlovskiy District Court of Krasnoyarsk authorised his placement in custody for two months. The District Court reasoned that the applicant was being charged with a particularly serious criminal offence, which he had allegedly committed not long after having served a prison sentence after a previous conviction for a similar crime. The court also took into account the lack of a stable income as the applicant worked as an estate agent. These circumstances were interpreted by the District Court as evidence of the likelihood that the applicant might abscond, re-offend or pervert the course of justice. The applicant’s arguments that he was employed, that he was the breadwinner for a child who was still a minor and that he had a permanent place of residence did not convince the court. Nor did the court find that the applicant’s poor health warranted his release, given that he was able to receive professional medical assistance in detention.
.  The applicant did not appeal against the detention order.
.  On 15 August 2012, the applicant was admitted to detention facility no. IZ-24/1.
.  On 12 October 2012 the Sverdlovskiy District Court accepted the investigator’s request for an extension of the applicant’s detention until 12 December 2012. The court again found that, given his criminal history and the gravity of the charges, the applicant was likely to abscond, re-offend or tamper with witnesses. The District Court did not find any evidence indicating that the applicant was not fit to remain in custody or was not receiving the necessary medical assistance in detention.
.  The extension order of 12 October 2012 was upheld on appeal by the Krasnoyarsk Regional Court, which fully endorsed the District Court’s arguments. The Regional Court also noted that the applicant and his lawyer failed to submit any evidence in support of their arguments alleging a lack of medical assistance in detention.
.  Another extension of the applicant’s detention until 12 February 2013 followed on 11 December 2012, when the Sverdlovskiy District Court found that the circumstances warranting his arrest persisted. The court once again dismissed the argument concerning the applicant’s poor health and lack of proper medical assistance in detention.
.  On 10 January 2013 the Krasnoyarsk Regional Court upheld the decision on appeal, having been fully convinced by the District Court’s reasoning. As to the applicant’s argument about his poor state of health, the Regional Court reasoned:
“Despite the accused’s argument, [the court] did not establish any circumstances related to his health or any other personal grounds precluding his detention in the conditions consistent with a temporary detention facility. Amongst the case-file materials there is no medical report showing that [the applicant] was suffering from a serious illness included in the List of Serious Illnesses precluding Detention of Suspects and Accused Persons, as adopted by decree of the Government of the Russian Federation on 14 January 2011. The [District Court] did not examine any such report when it issued its decision [of 11 December 2012].
Moreover, [the applicant’s] argument that he was suffering from a serious life-threatening illness was not supported by any evidence contained in the file, even though the defence would have had ample opportunity to provide such evidence if it had existed.
If a medical commission issues a medical report examining the necessity for [the applicant’s] continued detention, an investigator will immediately examine that issue.”
.  On 21 January 2013 the applicant was served with the bill of indictment, having been charged with the sale, on a number of occasions, of a particularly large quantity of drugs within an organised group for the purpose of subsequent resale.
.  On 5 February 2013 the Leninskiy District Court of Krasnoyarsk extended the applicant’s detention until 11 May 2013, finding that the circumstances which had warranted the applicant’s arrest had not changed. The Court once again found that, given his criminal history and the gravity of the current charges, the applicant was likely to abscond, re-offend or tamper with witnesses.
.  The applicant lodged an appeal on points of law, but this was dismissed on 2 July 2013.
.  On 8 May 2013, the detention was further extended by the Leninskiy District Court until 11 July 2013. The court once again dismissed the argument concerning the applicant’s poor health and relied on the gravity of the charges and the applicant’s criminal record to support the finding of a risk of the applicant’s re-offending.
.  On 10 July 2013 the Leninskiy District Court extended the detention until 13 August 2013. The reasoning employed by the court was similar to that of the previous detention orders.
.  On 7 August 2013 the applicant was released against an undertaking not to leave his town, having regard to the fact that the investigation was closed, the applicant completed the reading of the file and the case was remitted to the trial court. On 24 March 2014 he was convicted of four counts of drug trafficking committed with an organised group and involving a particularly large amount of drugs.
.  In 2001 the applicant was diagnosed with an HIV infection.
.  A medical certificate issued on 18 October 2012 by a physician from detention facility no. IZ-24/1 where the applicant was detained indicated that the applicant was suffering from HIV infection in stage 4A, penile cancer of the first degree and chronic hepatitis C (HCV).
.  The applicant argued that upon his arrest on 13 August 2012 antiretroviral drugs had been taken from him. The Government disputed that allegation.
.  The Government provided the Court with handwritten and typed versions of the applicant’s medical records, setting out the applicant’s medical history and, in particular, the development of his HIV infection. On 16 August 2012, that is on the day following his admission to detention facility no. IZ-24/1, the applicant had been examined by a medical panel which had found him HIV-positive. On the following day the applicant had been prescribed Combivir, a fixed dose combination of the drugs lamivudine (Epivir) and zidovudine (Retrovir), and Kaletra, a fixed dose combination of lopinavir and ritonavir. The handwritten medical records show that during the entire period of his detention the applicant regularly received those drugs. He was also prescribed a special diet.
.  During his detention the applicant had been monitored regularly in relation to his HIV infection. The CD4 cell count tests carried out on 24 October 2012, 28 March and 2 July 2013 had revealed a slight, but steady increase of CD4 cells to 579, 618, and 644 cells/mm3, respectively.
.  On an unspecified date the applicant informed the medical personnel of the detention facility that in 2010 he had been diagnosed with penile cancer. On 25 April 2013 he was examined by the head of the medical department with regard to this complaint. The doctor did not detect any visible symptoms. However, the applicant was referred for examination by an oncologist and an infectious disease specialist at regional tuberculosis hospital no. 1.
.  On 17 May 2013 the applicant was seen by the head of the oncological department at regional tuberculosis hospital no. 1. The doctor suggested a biopsy, which the applicant refused to undergo.
.  The case file contains no information as to whether the applicant received any treatment in relation to his hepatitis C.
.  On 16 November 2012 the applicant complained to the Regional Prosecutor that antiretroviral drugs had been taken from him upon his arrest on 13 August 2012.
.  The applicant also sent a written request to the Investigating Department of the Krasnoyarsk Region seeking a forensic medical expert examination to determine whether he was suffering from a condition which, under Russian penitentiary rules, would preclude his detention on remand.
.  On 6 December 2012 a deputy prosecutor of the Sverdlovsk District prosecutor’s office sent a letter to the applicant informing him that the courts had already examined his arguments pertaining to his state of health while determining the issue of his further detention on remand. The deputy prosecutor pointed out that the courts had not established that the applicant was suffering from any serious illness precluding his detention on remand.
.  On 28 December 2012 the deputy prosecutor sent another letter to the applicant. The content of the letter was similar to that of the previous one.
Russian law gives detailed guidelines governing the provision of medical assistance to detained individuals. These guidelines, laid down in joint Decree no. 640/190 of the Ministry of Health and Social Development and the Ministry of Justice on the Organisation of Medical Assistance to Individuals Serving Sentences or Remanded in Custody (“the Regulation”), enacted on 17 October 2005, are applicable without exception to all detainees. In particular, section III of the Regulation sets out the steps to be taken by the medical personnel of a detention facility upon the admission of a detainee. On arrival at a temporary detention facility, all detainees should be subjected to a preliminary medical examination before they are placed in a cell shared with other inmates. The aim of the examination is to identify individuals suffering from contagious diseases and those in need of urgent medical assistance. Particular attention should be paid to individuals suffering from contagious conditions. No later than three days after the detainee’s arrival at the detention facility he or she should be given an indepth medical examination, including an X-ray. During the in-depth examination a prison doctor should register the detainee’s complaints, study his medical and personal history, record any injuries and recent tattoos, and schedule additional medical procedures, if necessary. A prison doctor should also authorise laboratory analyses to identify sexually transmitted diseases, HIV, tuberculosis and other illnesses.
Subsequent medical examinations of detainees are performed at least twice a year or following complaints from a detainee. If a detainee’s state of health has deteriorated, medical examinations and assistance should be provided by the detention facility medical staff. In such cases the medical examination should include a general check-up and additional tests, if necessary, with the participation of the relevant specialists. The results of the examinations should be recorded in the detainee’s medical file. The detainee should be comprehensively informed about the results of the medical examinations.
Section III of the Regulation also sets out the procedure to be followed in the event that the detainee refuses to undergo a medical examination or treatment. For each refusal, an entry should be made in the detainee’s medical record. A prison doctor should comprehensively explain to the detainee the consequences of his refusal to undergo the medical procedure.
Any medicines prescribed to the detainee must be taken in the presence of a doctor. In certain exceptional circumstances, the head of the detention facility medical department may authorise his medical personnel to hand over a daily dose of medicines to the detainee to be taken unsupervised.
.  The Internal Regulations of Correctional Institutions, in force since 3 November 2005, deal with every aspect of inmates’ lives in correctional institutions. In particular, paragraph 125 of the Regulations provides that inmates who are willing and able to pay for it may receive additional medical assistance. In such a situation, medical specialists from a State or municipal civilian hospital are to be called to the medical unit of the correctional institution where the inmate is being detained.
.  Governmental Decree no. 3 of 14 January 2011 concerning the medical examination of individuals suspected or accused of criminal offences regulates the procedure for authorising and performing the medical examination of a detainee to determine whether he or she is suffering from a serious illness precluding his or her detention. It also contains a list of such serious illnesses. A decision ordering the medical examination of a detainee is taken by the director of the detention facility following a written request from the detainee or his or her legal representative or a request by the head of the medical unit of that detention facility. The examination is performed by the medical commission of the facility appointed by the executive body of the health service of the respective region of the Russian Federation. The activities of the medical commission are determined by the Ministry of Health and Social Development of the Russian Federation.
.  The examination must be performed within five days of the medical facility’s receiving the relevant order. Following the examination, the medical commission issues a report stating whether the detainee is suffering from one of the serious illnesses listed in the Decree. If a detainee who was previously examined by the medical commission experiences deterioration in his or her health, a new medical examination can be authorised.
.  The list of serious illnesses precluding the detention of suspected or accused persons includes stage 4C or 5 HIV infection accompanied by stable health impairment leading to a significant reduction in vitality and requiring lengthy treatment in a specialised medical facility.
.  The provisions of domestic law establishing the legal avenues for complaints about the quality of medical services are cited in the following judgments: Koryak v. Russia, no. 24677/10, §§ 46-57, 13 November 2012; Dirdizov v. Russia, no. 41461/10, §§ 47-61, 27 November 2012; and Reshetnyak v. Russia, no. 56027/10, §§ 35-46, 8 January 2013.
The relevant provisions governing detention are described in the judgment of Pyatkov v. Russia (no. 61767/08, §§ 48-66, 13 November 2012).
.  The Russian Code of Criminal Procedure, in force since 1 July 2002 (CCrP) provides, in addition to detention, the following measures of restraint or preventive measures: an undertaking not to leave a town or region, personal surety, bail , house arrest and supervision of a minor or of the military command (Article 98).
.  Article 102 of the CCrP indicates that a suspect or an accused may be released against a written undertaking not to leave a certain area (the place of permanent or temporary residence) without a permission from the investigating authorities or a court, as well as against an undertaking to respond to summons from the investigation and the court and not to interfere with the proceedings in the criminal case.
.  Article 107 § 1 of the CCrP provides that house arrest consisted of restricting a suspect’s or an accused’s freedom of movement, as well as forbidding him or her to (1) communicate with certain persons, (2) receive and send correspondence, and (3) conduct conversations using any means of communication. A suspect or an accused could be put under house arrest on the grounds and in accordance with the procedure set out in in the CCrP for placement in custody, with due regard for the person’s age, health, family status and other circumstances (Article 107 § 2). A decision to place a suspect or an accused under house arrest is to specify the restrictions imposed and designate a supervisory authority to ensure that the restrictions were observed (Article 107 § 3).
.  The European Prison Rules provide a framework of guiding principles for health services. The relevant extracts from the Rules read:
“Health care
Prison authorities shall safeguard the health of all prisoners in their care.
Organisation of prison health care
1  Medical services in prison shall be organised in close relation with the general health administration of the community or nation.
2  Health policy in prisons shall be integrated into, and compatible with, national health policy.
3  Prisoners shall have access to the health services available in the country without discrimination on the grounds of their legal situation.
4  Medical services in prison shall seek to detect and treat physical or mental illnesses or defects from which prisoners may suffer.
5  All necessary medical, surgical and psychiatric services including those available in the community shall be provided to the prisoner for that purpose.
Medical and health care personnel
1  Every prison shall have the services of at least one qualified general medical practitioner.
2  Arrangements shall be made to ensure at all times that a qualified medical practitioner is available without delay in cases of urgency.
...
4  Every prison shall have personnel suitably trained in health care.
Duties of the medical practitioner
1  The medical practitioner or a qualified nurse reporting to such a medical practitioner shall see every prisoner as soon as possible after admission, and shall examine them unless this is obviously unnecessary.
...
3  When examining a prisoner the medical practitioner or a qualified nurse reporting to such a medical practitioner shall pay particular attention to:
..;
diagnosing physical or mental illness and taking all measures necessary for its treatment and for the continuation of existing medical treatment;
...
1  The medical practitioner shall have the care of the physical and mental health of the prisoners and shall see, under the conditions and with a frequency consistent with health care standards in the community, all sick prisoners, all who report illness or injury and any prisoner to whom attention is specially directed.
...
Health care provision
1  Sick prisoners who require specialist treatment shall be transferred to specialised institutions or to civil hospitals when such treatment is not available in prison.
2  Where a prison service has its own hospital facilities, they shall be adequately staffed and equipped to provide the prisoners referred to them with appropriate care and treatment.”
The complexity and importance of health-care services in detention facilities was discussed by the European Committee for the Prevention of Torture in its 3rd General Report (CPT/Inf (93) 12 - Publication Date: 4 June 1993). The following are extracts from the Report:
“33.  When entering prison, all prisoners should without delay be seen by a member of the establishment’s health care service. In its reports to date the CPT has recommended that every newly arrived prisoner be properly interviewed and, if necessary, physically examined by a medical doctor as soon as possible after his admission. It should be added that in some countries, medical screening on arrival is carried out by a fully qualified nurse, who reports to a doctor. This latter approach could be considered as a more efficient use of available resources.
It is also desirable that a leaflet or booklet be handed to prisoners on their arrival, informing them of the existence and operation of the health care service and reminding them of basic measures of hygiene.
While in custody, prisoners should be able to have access to a doctor at any time, irrespective of their detention regime ... The health care service should be so organised as to enable requests to consult a doctor to be met without undue delay ...
A prison’s health care service should at least be able to provide regular out-patient consultations and emergency treatment (of course, in addition there may often be a hospital-type unit with beds) ... Further, prison doctors should be able to call upon the services of specialists.
As regards emergency treatment, a doctor should always be on call. Further, someone competent to provide first aid should always be present on prison premises, preferably someone with a recognised nursing qualification.
Out-patient treatment should be supervised, as appropriate, by health care staff; in many cases it is not sufficient for the provision of follow-up care to depend upon the initiative being taken by the prisoner.
The direct support of a fully-equipped hospital service should be available, in either a civil or prison hospital ...
A prison health care service should be able to provide medical treatment and nursing care, as well as appropriate diets, physiotherapy, rehabilitation or any other necessary special facility, in conditions comparable to those enjoyed by patients in the outside community. Provision in terms of medical, nursing and technical staff, as well as premises, installations and equipment, should be geared accordingly.
There should be appropriate supervision of the pharmacy and of the distribution of medicines. Further, the preparation of medicines should always be entrusted to qualified staff (pharmacist/nurse, etc.). ...
A medical file should be compiled for each patient, containing diagnostic information as well as an ongoing record of the patient’s evolution and of any special examinations he has undergone. In the event of a transfer, the file should be forwarded to the doctors in the receiving establishment.
Further, daily registers should be kept by health care teams, in which particular incidents relating to the patients should be mentioned. Such registers are useful in that they provide an overall view of the health care situation in the prison, at the same time as highlighting specific problems which may arise.
The smooth operation of a health care service presupposes that doctors and nursing staff are able to meet regularly and to form a working team under the authority of a senior doctor in charge of the service. ...”
.  The Guidelines for Antiretroviral therapy for HIV infection in adults and adolescents issued by the World Health Organization (WHO) within the HIV/AIDS programme, following revision in 2010, recommended the commencement of antiretroviral treatment in all patients with HIV of WHO clinical stage 3 or 4, irrespective of the CD4 count. This recommendation remained unchanged following the revision of the Guidelines in June 2013.
The Guidelines revised in 2010 also contained a note on coinfection with HIV and hepatitis C, which read:
“Hepatitis C (HCV) coinfection is significantly associated with increased risk of death and advanced liver disease in HIV-positive individuals. HIV infection accelerates HCV-related disease progression and mortality but the reciprocal effect of HCV on the rate of HIV disease progression remains difficult to quantify because of the heterogeneity of study results. A recent meta-analysis showed an increase in the overall risk of mortality but did not demonstrate an increased risk of AIDS-defining events among coinfected patients.
A major observational cohort study on the level of toxicities of specific ART regimens used for HIV/HCV coinfection did not find significant differences. However, the systematic review on drug-drug interactions prepared for these guidelines found important pharmacological interactions between ribavirin and ABC, ATV, AZT, d4T and ddI that can increase the toxicity risk if these drugs are used concomitantly.
Many studies also suggest that the sustained viral response rates of HCV therapy in HIV coinfected individuals are significantly lower than in HCV-monoinfected patient but others have achieved higher rates in this population.
Considering the significant level of uncertainty on these topics and the importance of hepatitis C management in the context of HIV coinfection (an important gap highlighted by the guidelines panel group, particularly the representatives from the people living with HIV community), WHO is planning to revise the recommendations for the prevention and treatment of major HIV-related opportunistic infections and comorbidities, including hepatitis C. Furthermore, it is expected that the 2010 World Health Assembly will establish global policy recommendations for the management of viral hepatitis, which will increase support for an integrated approach to the prevention, treatment and care of HIV/HCV coinfection.
Meanwhile, the initiation of ART in HIV/HCV coinfected people should follow the same principles and recommendations as for its initiation in HIV-monoinfected individuals. However, patients should be closely monitored because of the increased risk of drug toxicities and drug interactions between some ARVs and anti-HCV drugs.”
.  The Guidelines on Penile Cancer issued by the European Association of Urology, the leading authority within Europe on urological practice, research and education, read, insofar as relevant:
“6.2.1 Penile biopsy
There is no need for biopsy if:
• there is no doubt about the diagnosis and/or
• treatment of the lymph nodes is postponed after treatment of the primary tumour and/or after histological examination of the sentinel node(s).
There is a need for histological confirmation if:
• there is doubt about the exact nature of the lesion (e.g. metastasis or melanoma) and/or
• treatment of the lymph nodes is based on preoperative histological information (risk-adapted strategy).
In these cases an adequate biopsy is advised.”