The case originated in an application (no. 34044/08) against the Russian Federation lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Nigerian national, Mr Richard Mela (“the applicant”), on 7 April 2008 when he introduced his complaints about the conditions of his pre-trial detention in the remand prison in 2007-08 and the alleged unlawfulness of his pre-trial detention. On 12 January 2010 the applicant introduced a complaint about the conditions of his detention in the correctional colony. On 23 February 2012 the applicant lodged a complaint concerning the conditions of his detention in the remand prison in 2009-11.
The Russian Government (“the Government”) were represented by Mr G. Matyushkin, Representative of the Russian Federation at the European Court of Human Rights.
The applicant alleged, in particular, that he had been detained in appalling conditions and in the absence of any charges against him.
On 23 September 2011 the application was communicated to the Government.
The applicant was born in 1979 and lives in Lagos, Nigeria.
On 27 September 2007 the applicant was arrested on suspicion of robbery. On 28 September 2007 the Krasnogvardeiskiy District Court of St Petersburg authorised his detention pending investigation. The court noted that the applicant was suspected of having committed a serious offence entailing a custodial sentence of up to seven years, that he did not have a permanent place of residence or employment in St Petersburg and that, if released, he might re-offend or abscond. The applicant appealed.
On 9 October 2007 the applicant was charged with robbery.
On 22 October 2007 the applicant lodged a complaint against the investigator, claiming that he had been charged belatedly. He argued that he should have been released in view of the applicable rules of criminal procedure, which provided that, if a suspect was not charged within ten days of his arrest, he was to be released immediately.
On 26 October 2007 the District Court dismissed the applicant’s complaint lodged on 22 October 2007, noting that the appeal proceedings concerning the lawfulness of the applicant’s detention authorised by the court order of 28 September 2007 were still pending. On 29 January 2008 the City Court upheld the decision of 26 October 2007 on appeal.
On 1 November 2007 the St Petersburg City Court upheld the court order of 28 September 2007 on appeal.
On 21 December 2007 the District Court extended the applicant’s pre-trial detention until 27 January 2008. On 26 February 2008 the City Court upheld the relevant decision on appeal. The applicant remained in custody during the criminal proceedings against him.
On 1 April 2008 the District Court found the applicant guilty as charged and sentenced him to four years’ imprisonment.
On 22 July 2008 the City Court upheld the applicant’s conviction on appeal.
Following the applicant’s arrest, the investigator in charge of his case seized the applicant’s Nigerian passport, which was supposed to be filed together with the other materials concerning the criminal investigation. It appears that the passport was lost.
In response to a complaint lodged by the applicant, the regional department of the interior carried out an inquiry, which confirmed the applicant’s allegations about the loss of the passport. The investigator was subjected to a disciplinary sanction. On 5 September 2010 the applicant was informed accordingly. As regards the issuance of a new passport, the applicant was advised to contact the Nigerian consulate.
It appears that the applicant unsuccessfully attempted to bring a civil action against the domestic authorities for the loss of his passport. On 17 December 2010 the Tverskoy District Court of Moscow dismissed the applicant’s claims against the Ministry of Finance. The applicant appealed. He did not inform the Court about the outcome of the appeal proceedings.
As regards the timeframe of the applicant’s detention, the Government provided the following information:
On 26 September 2011 the applicant was released, having served his prison sentence.
According to the Government, all the cells in the remand prison, except for the hospital wards, measured 8.4 square metres. They were equipped with four beds. The number of inmates detained with the applicant never exceeded four persons in each cell.
The Government submitted the following excerpts from the remand prison population register:
All the cells were equipped with a ventilation system in working order. The windows in the cells had small vents, which could be kept open to ensure access to fresh air. The metal grills on the windows with openings measuring 10 by 20 cm did not prevent access to daylight.
During the daytime the cells were lit with a 60-75-watt electric bulb. During the night the cells were lit with a 40-watt electric bulb. The temperature in the cells was maintained at +22oC in the summer and +18oC in the winter.
The toilet in each cell was separated from the living area by a 1.5metre high wooden partition and a door, which ensured sufficient privacy. The distance between the toilet and the dining table was at least 2 metres. There was a sink with hot and cold running tap water.
The meals provided to the detainees were in compliance with ration and quality standards. The applicant was allowed to take a fifteen-minute shower at least once a week. The bed sheets were changed weekly. The inmates were allowed daily outdoor exercise for at least an hour.
According to the applicant, he was held in cells nos. 42, 101, 142, 149, 741, 742 and 778 of the remand prison. All the cells were of the same size and the conditions of detention were the same.
The cells were overcrowded and the inmates had to take turns to sleep. On many occasions persons suffering from hepatitis or HIV-infected inmates were placed in the same cell. The toilet was not separated from the living area of the cell. The ventilation did not function. It was hot in the summer and cold in the winter. The food was of a low quality. The inmates were not provided with toiletries. The mattresses and bed sheets were of a poor quality. The light was constantly on. The inmates were allowed only one-hour’s daily exercise.
The Government submitted the following information as regards the applicant’s detention in the correctional colony:
At all times the applicant was provided with an individual bed. The windows in the dormitories ensured adequate access to daylight. The lavatory was separate from the living area of the units. Each toilet was located in a separate cubicle. The quarantine section had five wash sinks, four toilets and six urinals. In unit 11 there were ten wash sinks, four toilets and one urinal. In unit 16 there were six wash sinks, six toilets and six urinals. The temperature and lighting were adequate. The inmates had access to an outdoor exercise area in accordance with the schedule.
According to the applicant, the dormitories were overcrowded and he did not have an individual bed. He was assigned to a dormitory measuring 46 sq. m and housing from twenty-five to thirty inmates. On many occasions persons suffering from hepatitis or HIV-infected inmates were placed in the same dormitory. The bathroom in the building housing 150 persons was equipped with three toilets. The inmates were allowed one shower per week. The shower room measured 36 sq. m and was equipped with fourteen shower heads. Each person had from approximately seven to thirteen minutes to take a shower.
Section 23 of the Detention of Suspects Act of 15 July 1995 provides that detainees should be kept in conditions that meet sanitary and hygienic requirements. They should be provided with an individual sleeping place and be given bedding, tableware and toiletries. Each inmate should have no less than four square metres of personal space in his or her cell.
Article 99 § 1 of the Penitentiary Code of 8 January 1997 provides for a minimum standard of two square metres of personal space for male prisoners in correctional colonies.
The Russian Code of Criminal Procedure (Article 100) provides for a possibility to impose a measure of restraint, including remand in custody, on a person suspected of having committed a criminal offence such as robbery before he is actually charged. In such a case, should a suspect not be charged within ten days of his arrest, the measure of restraint imposed on him should be lifted and he is to be released immediately.