The case originated in two applications (nos. 10211/12 and 27505/14) against the Federal Republic of Germany lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a German national, Mr Daniel Ilnseher (“the applicant”), on 24 February 2012 and 4 April 2014 respectively.
The applicant, who had been granted legal aid in connection with the presentation of both applications, was initially represented in application no. 10211/12 by Mr A. Ahmed, a lawyer practising in Munich, and subsequently in both applications by Mr I.-J. Tegebauer, a lawyer practising in Trier. The German Government (“the Government”) were represented by theirs Agents, Ms A. Wittling-Vogel, Mr H.-J. Behrens and Ms K. Behr, of the Federal Ministry of Justice and Consumer Protection.
The applicant alleged, in particular, that his “retrospective” preventive detention (nachträgliche Sicherungsverwahrung; see for the terminology also paragraphs 104-106 and 157 below) – at issue, ordered in the main proceedings, had violated Article 5 § 1 and Article 7 § 1 of the Convention. Relying on Article 6 § 1 of the Convention, he further complained that the domestic courts had not decided speedily on the lawfulness of his provisional preventive detention, and that Judge P. had been biased against him in the main proceedings concerning the order for his “retrospective” preventive detention.
The applications were allocated to the Fifth Section of the Court (Rule 52 § 1 of the Rules of Court). On 26 November 2013 the Government were given notice of application no. 10211/12. On 22 December 2014 the complaints concerning the order for the applicant’s subsequent preventive detention and the complaint about the partiality of Judge P. made in application no. 27505/14 were communicated to the Government, and the remainder of that application was declared inadmissible pursuant to Rule  54  § 3 of the Rules of Court.
On 2 February 2017 a Chamber of the Fifth Section composed of Erik Møse, President, Angelika Nußberger, Ganna Yudkivska, Faris  Vehabović, Yonko Grozev, Síofra O’Leary and Mārtiņš Mits, judges, and Milan Blaško, Deputy Section Registrar, unanimously decided to join the applications. It struck part of the applications out of its list of cases following the Government’s unilateral declaration under Articles 5 and 7 § 1 of the Convention relating to the applicant’s preventive detention from 6 May 2011 to 20 June 2013, and declared the remainder of the applications admissible. It further held, unanimously, that there had been no violation of Article 5 § 1 of the Convention and no violation of Article 7 § 1 of the Convention on account of the applicant’s preventive detention from 20 June 2013 onwards. Moreover, it unanimously held that there had been no violation of Article 5 § 4 of the Convention on account of the duration of the proceedings for review of the applicant’s provisional preventive detention and no violation of Article 6 § 1 of the Convention on account of the alleged lack of impartiality of Judge P. in the main proceedings resulting in a new preventive detention order against the applicant.
On 15 March 2017 the applicant requested that the case be referred to the Grand Chamber in accordance with Article 43 of the Convention and Rule 73 of the Rules of Court. On 29 May 2017 the Panel of the Grand Chamber accepted that request.
The composition of the Grand Chamber was determined according to the provisions of Article 26 §§ 4 and 5 of the Convention and Rule 24 of the Rules of Court. At the first deliberations, Stéphanie Mourou-Vikström, substitute judge, replaced Işıl Karakaş, who was unable to take part in the further consideration of the case (Rule 24 § 3).
The applicant and the Government each filed a memorial on the merits (Rule 59 § 1). In addition, third-party comments were received from the European Prison Litigation Network, which had been granted leave by the President on 30 August 2017 to intervene in the written proceedings (Article 36 § 2 of the Convention and Rule 44 §§ 3 and 4).
A hearing took place in public in the Human Rights Building, Strasbourg, on 29 November 2017 (Rule 59 § 3).
There appeared before the Court:
The Court heard addresses by Mr Tegebauer, Mr Mavany and Mr Giegerich and their replies to questions put by judges.
The applicant was born in 1978 and is currently detained in the centre for persons in preventive detention on the premises of Straubing Prison (hereinafter “the Straubing preventive detention centre”).
On 29 October 1999 the Regensburg Regional Court convicted the applicant of murder and, applying the criminal law relating to young offenders, sentenced him to ten years’ imprisonment. It found that in June 1997 the applicant, then aged nineteen, had strangled a woman who had been jogging on a forest path by use of considerable force with a cable, a tree branch and his hands, had partly undressed the dead or dying victim and had then masturbated. The court, having consulted two medical experts, found that the applicant had acted with full criminal responsibility when killing the woman for sexual gratification and in order to cover up his intended rape. The court noted that, despite indications to that effect, both experts had not wished to draw the conclusion that the applicant suffered from a sexual deviancy as the young applicant had made few statements on the motives for his offence.
On 12 July 2008 a new legislative provision, section 7(2) of the Juvenile Courts Act, entered into force. It authorised the ordering of subsequent preventive detention (see for the terminology also paragraphs 104-106 and 157 below) of persons convicted under the criminal law relating to young offenders (see paragraphs 54-57 below).
From 17 July 2008 onwards, after he had served his full prison sentence, the applicant was remanded in provisional preventive detention under Article 275a § 5 of the Code of Criminal Procedure (see paragraph 61 below).
On 22 June 2009 the Regensburg Regional Court, with Judge P. sitting on the bench, ordered the applicant’s subsequent preventive detention under section 7(2)(1) of the Juvenile Courts Act, read in conjunction with section 105(1) of the Juvenile Courts Act (see paragraphs 56 and 59 below). The court, having regard to the reports made by a criminological expert (Bo.) and a psychiatric expert (Ba.), found that the applicant continued to harbour violent sexual fantasies and that there was a high risk that he would again commit serious sexual offences, including murder for sexual gratification, if released. On 9 March 2010 the Federal Court of Justice dismissed the applicant’s appeal on points of law against the Regional Court’s judgment.
On 4 May 2011 the Federal Constitutional Court, in a leading judgment, allowed the applicant’s constitutional complaint. It quashed the Regional Court’s judgment of 22 June 2009 and the Federal Court of Justice’s judgment of 9 March 2010 and remitted the case to the Regional Court. It further found the order for the applicant’s provisional preventive detention – which had become devoid of purpose once the order for the applicant’s subsequent preventive detention in the main proceedings had become final – to be unconstitutional (file no. 2 BvR 2333/08 and no.  2 BvR 1152/10). The Federal Constitutional Court found that the impugned judgments and decisions had violated the applicant’s right to liberty and the constitutional protection of legitimate expectations guaranteed in a State governed by the rule of law (see in more detail paragraphs 68-75 below).
On 5 May 2011 the applicant requested that the Regensburg Regional Court order his immediate release. He claimed that following the Federal Constitutional Court’s judgment of 4 May 2011, which had quashed the judgment ordering his subsequent preventive detention, there was no longer any legal basis for his detention.
On 6 May 2011 the Regensburg Regional Court, allowing the Public Prosecutor’s request of 5 May 2011, again ordered the applicant’s provisional preventive detention under sections 7(4) and 105(1) of the Juvenile Courts Act, read in conjunction with Article 275a § 5, first sentence, of the Code of Criminal Procedure (see paragraphs 59 and 61 below). The court found that the applicant’s provisional preventive detention was necessary because there were weighty grounds for expecting that his subsequent preventive detention would be ordered under section  7(2)(1) of the Juvenile Courts Act, read in the light of the judgment of the Federal Constitutional Court of 4 May 2011.
By submissions dated 27 June 2011, received by the Regional Court on 29 June 2011, the applicant lodged an appeal against the Regional Court’s decision, for which he submitted further statements of grounds on 15, 19, 22, 25 and 26 July 2011. He claimed, in particular, that his provisional preventive detention was unlawful.
On 4 July 2011 the Regensburg Regional Court refused to amend its decision of 6 May 2011.
On 16 August 2011 the Nuremberg Court of Appeal dismissed the applicant’s appeal as ill-founded. It had regard to: (i) a request lodged by the Nuremberg General Public Prosecutor on 20 July 2011 requesting the dismissal of the applicant’s appeal; (ii) the findings of fact made by the Regensburg Regional Court in its judgment of 22 June 2009; (iii) the findings of two medical experts in the proceedings leading to the judgment of 22 June 2009; (iv) the findings of two other experts in previous proceedings regarding the applicant’s mental condition and the level of danger that he posed; and (v) the new restrictive standards set by the Federal Constitutional Court in its judgment of 4 May 2011.
On 29 August 2011 the Nuremberg Court of Appeal dismissed the applicant’s complaint regarding a breach of his right to be heard and his objection to the decision of 16 August 2011. The decision was served on counsel for the applicant on 6 September 2011.
On 7 September 2011 the applicant lodged a constitutional complaint with the Federal Constitutional Court against the decision of the Regensburg Regional Court dated 6 May 2011, as confirmed by the Nuremberg Court of Appeal. He further requested that the execution of those decisions be stayed by way of an interim measure until the Federal Constitutional Court delivered its decision. The applicant claimed, in particular, that his right to a speedy decision, enshrined in his constitutional right to liberty, had not been respected in the proceedings concerning the review of his provisional preventive detention.
On 18 October 2011 the Federal Constitutional Court communicated the applicant’s constitutional complaint to the regional Government of Bavaria, to the President of the Federal Court of Justice and to the General Public Prosecutor at the latter court.
On 25 October 2011 the Federal Constitutional Court, in a reasoned decision, refused to stay the order for the applicant’s provisional preventive detention by way of an interim measure.
By submissions dated 1 January 2012 the applicant replied to the submissions of the regional Government of Bavaria, of the President of the Federal Court of Justice and of the General Public Prosecutor at the latter court dated 28, 24 and 25 November 2011 respectively.
On 22 May 2012 the Federal Constitutional Court, without giving reasons, declined to consider the applicant’s constitutional complaint (file no. 2 BvR 1952/11). The decision was served on counsel for the applicant on 30 May 2012.
On 17 November 2011 the applicant lodged a fresh request for judicial review of his provisional preventive detention. By a decision of 28 November 2011 the Regensburg Regional Court upheld the applicant’s provisional preventive detention as ordered on 6 May 2011. On 2 January 2012 the Nuremberg Court of Appeal dismissed the applicant’s appeal against that decision.
In the resumed proceedings before the Regensburg Regional Court following the remittal of the case to it (see paragraph 15 above), the applicant lodged a motion against Judge P. for bias. The latter had been a member of the bench of the Regensburg Regional Court which had ordered the applicant’s subsequent preventive detention on 22 June 2009 (see paragraph 14 above). The applicant alleged that Judge P. had remarked to the applicant’s female defence counsel on 22 June 2009, immediately after the delivery of the Regional Court’s judgment ordering the applicant’s subsequent preventive detention, in reference to the applicant: “Be careful that after he is released, you don’t find him standing in front of your door waiting to thank you.” He claimed that the remark had been made in the course of a discussion in camera between the judges of the Regional Court and the applicant’s two lawyers concerning the applicant’s possible transfer to a psychiatric hospital following the Regional Court’s judgment.
In a comment of 13 December 2011 on the applicant’s motion for bias, Judge P. explained that he remembered having had a discussion about the applicant’s possible transfer to a psychiatric hospital at a later stage, after the delivery of the judgment. However, given the length of time that had elapsed, he neither recalled the precise contents of the discussion nor the exact context in which he had allegedly made the impugned remark.
On 2 January 2012 the Regensburg Regional Court dismissed the motion for bias lodged by the applicant. The court considered in particular that, even assuming that the applicant had established to the satisfaction of the court that Judge P. had made the remark in question, there were no objectively justified doubts as to P.’s impartiality as a result thereof. Even assuming that the applicant could reasonably consider the sense of the words “thank you” in the above context as meaning that the applicant could commit a violent offence, it had to be noted that the Regional Court, including Judge P., had just established that the applicant still suffered from fantasies of sexual violence and that there was at that time a high risk that he would again commit serious offences against the life and sexual selfdetermination of others. Assuming that Judge P. had indeed made the remark in question, his “advice” had therefore constituted in substance nothing more than the application of the Regional Court’s said findings to a particular case. The remark had further been made in the context of a confidential exchange between the participants in the proceedings in the absence of the applicant. Judge P. could have expected that the applicant’s female counsel would interpret his remark in the above-mentioned manner within that context.
Furthermore, Judge P.’s remark had reflected his view as it had been on the day of the Regional Court’s judgment of 22 June 2009. It did not suggest in any way that Judge P. had not been ready to take an impartial decision in the present proceedings, more than two years after the impugned remark and following the conclusion of a new main hearing. The fact that Judge P. had previously dealt with the applicant’s case did not in itself render him biased.
On 3 August 2012 the Regensburg Regional Court, having held hearings over twenty-four days, again ordered the applicant’s subsequent preventive detention.
The Regional Court based its 164-page judgment on sections 7(2)(1) and 105(1) of the Juvenile Courts Act, read in conjunction with the Federal Constitutional Court’s judgment of 4 May 2011. It considered, firstly, that a comprehensive assessment of the applicant, his offence and, in addition, his development during the execution of the sentence relating to young offenders revealed that there was a high risk that the applicant, owing to specific circumstances relating to his person or his conduct, could commit the most serious types of violent crimes and sexual offences, similar to the one he had been found guilty of, if released.
The Regional Court found, secondly, that the applicant suffered from a mental disorder for the purposes of section 1(1) of the Therapy Detention Act (see paragraph 85 below), namely sexual sadism. Having regard to the case-law of the Federal Court of Justice and the Federal Constitutional Court, it considered that, whereas a mere “accentuation of the personality” was not sufficient to constitute a mental disorder within the meaning of the said Act, such disorder did not have to be so serious as to exclude or diminish the criminal responsibility of the person concerned for the purposes of Articles 20 and 21 of the Criminal Code (see paragraphs 82-83 and 88-89 below). Given that the sexual sadism from which the applicant suffered was of a serious nature and had substantially affected his development since adolescence, it amounted to a mental disorder within the meaning of the Therapy Detention Act.
The Regional Court based its view on the reports of two experienced external medical experts whom it had consulted, K. and F., who were professors and doctors for psychiatry and psychotherapy at two different university hospitals. One of the experts consulted, K., was firmly convinced that the applicant continued to suffer from sexual sadism while the other expert, F., formulated his findings more cautiously, stating that it was certain that the applicant had suffered from sexual sadism in 2005 and that this disorder could not be expected to have disappeared.
Having regard to the findings of these experts, as well as to those of several medical experts who had previously examined the applicant since his arrest following his offence, the Regional Court was satisfied that the applicant has had violent sexual fantasies involving the strangulation of women since the age of seventeen. He was suffering from a sexual preference disorder, namely sexual sadism, as described by the relevant tool for the classification of diseases, the International Statistical Classification of Diseases and Related Health Problems in its current version (ICD-10); this disorder had caused, and been manifested in, his brutal offence, and still persisted. The court, having regard to the experts’ findings, observed that the applicant had hidden the sadistic motives behind his offence in the proceedings before the trial court in 1999, which, despite some indications of sexual deviance, had then interpreted the offence as an intended rape which had failed. The applicant, who had given diverging versions of the motive for his offence, had only admitted in 2005/2006, during his examination by a psychological and a psychiatric expert, that in his murder he had put into practice intensifying fantasies of exercising power over women by attacking their neck and by masturbating on their inanimate bodies. The applicant’s new statements concerning his fantasies were more reconcilable with the trial court’s findings as to the manner in which the offence had been carried out.
The court further observed that the therapy followed by the applicant up until 2007, in particular social therapy, which both experts K. and F. had considered as appropriate treatment for his condition, had been unsuccessful. Even though the applicant appeared not to refuse further therapy as a matter of principle, he was not currently undergoing any treatment. He had, in particular, opposed the prosecution’s request to the Regensburg Regional Court in 2010/2011 to transfer him to a psychiatric hospital under Article 67a §§ 2 and 1 of the Criminal Code (see paragraph 67 below) in order to treat his condition in a different setting. He had further refused meetings aimed at establishing a new individualised therapeutic programme with reference to the pending court proceedings.
In an appeal on points of law against the Regional Court’s judgment of 3 August 2012, the applicant complained of the unlawfulness of his “retrospective” preventive detention and of the fact that the judgment had been delivered with the participation of a biased judge, P.
On 5 March 2013 the Federal Court of Justice dismissed the applicant’s appeal on points of law as ill-founded.
On 11 April 2013 the applicant lodged a constitutional complaint with the Federal Constitutional Court. He complained, in particular, that the “retrospective” order for his preventive detention had infringed the prohibition on retrospective penalties under the Constitution and Article 7  § 1 of the Convention. Furthermore, that order had failed to comply with his constitutional right to liberty, with the protection of legitimate expectations in a State governed by the rule of law and with Article 5 § 1 of the Convention. He further argued that his constitutional right to a tribunal established by law had been violated because Judge P. had been biased against him.
On 5 December 2013 the Federal Constitutional Court declined to consider the applicant’s constitutional complaint without giving reasons (file no. 2 BvR 813/13).
The Regensburg Regional Court subsequently reviewed the necessity of the applicant’s preventive detention at regular intervals. It decided on 18 September 2014, 2 March 2016 and 6 April 2017 that the detention had to continue because the applicant’s mental disorder and consequent dangerousness persisted. Each of the court’s review decisions was based on a fresh report by a different psychiatric expert, all the experts consulted having diagnosed the applicant with sexual sadism. The applicant is currently still in preventive detention.
During the execution of his ten-year prison term (up until July 2008) the applicant was, in particular, detained in the social-therapeutic department for sexual offenders of Bayreuth Prison from 2001 to 2007, where he underwent social therapy. As the applicant failed to pursue the therapy with the requisite sincerity and motivation, the core issue of his deviant sexual fantasies could not be sufficiently addressed and the therapy was not completed successfully. In 2007 he was transferred to the social therapy for sexual offenders department of Straubing Prison, where a fresh attempt to treat him also failed owing to the applicant’s lack of motivation vis-à-vis the different therapies provided.
During the execution of his first preventive detention order, issued on 22 June 2009, the applicant had objected to the prosecution’s request to transfer him to a psychiatric hospital under Article 67a §§ 2 and 1 of the Criminal Code (see paragraph 67 below) in order to consolidate further his rehabilitation by undergoing treatment in that hospital. Moreover, he had turned down proposals for a further therapeutic programme in Straubing Prison.
On 7 May 2011, following the quashing of the first preventive detention order and the new order for the applicant’s provisional preventive detention, he was transferred from the wing for persons in preventive detention in Straubing Prison to a wing for persons in detention on remand. As a consequence, the applicant lost the privileges reserved for persons in preventive detention. In particular, he was no longer able to undergo any kind of therapy. On 13 September 2011 he was transferred back to, and once again detained in, the preventive detention wing of Straubing Prison until 20 June 2013, where he was offered social therapy. He rejected the proposal.
Since 20 June 2013 the applicant has been detained in the newly built Straubing preventive detention centre. That institution, which is situated in a separated fenced-off compound on the premises of Straubing Prison and can house up to 84 detainees, has more staff than Straubing Prison, namely one psychiatrist, seven psychologists, one general practitioner, four nurses, seven social workers, one lawyer, one teacher, one prison inspector, forty-four general prison staff members and four administrative staff members, providing for the detainees. Inmates can stay outside their cells, which nowadays measure 15 m² (compared to some 10 m² previously) and now include a kitchen unit and a separate bathroom, between 6 a.m. and 10.30 p.m.
In the Straubing preventive detention centre, inmates are provided with individualised medical and therapeutic treatment by specialised staff in accordance with an individual treatment plan. The treatment options have been considerably increased as compared to those proposed under the previous preventive detention regime in Straubing Prison. The applicant initially refused all types of therapeutic provision at that centre, including one-to-one or group social therapy, participation in an intensive treatment programme for sexual offenders, and therapy administered by an external psychiatrist. He took up one-to-one psychotherapy only after the period covered by the proceedings here at issue, from 10 June 2015 until 30 June 2017, with a psychologist from the preventive detention centre.
In accordance with a long-standing legal tradition, the German Criminal Code distinguishes between penalties (Strafen) and so-called measures of correction and prevention (Maßregeln der Besserung und Sicherung) to deal with unlawful acts. In this twin-track system of sanctions, penalties (see Articles 38 et seq. of the Criminal Code) mainly consist of prison sentences and fines, which are fixed in accordance with the defendant’s guilt (Article 46 § 1 of the Criminal Code). Measures of correction and prevention (see Articles 61 et seq. of the Criminal Code) consist mainly of placement in a psychiatric hospital (Article 63 of the Criminal Code), in a detoxification facility (Article 64 of the Criminal Code) or in preventive detention (Articles 66 et seq. of the Criminal Code). The purpose of these measures is to rehabilitate dangerous offenders and to protect the public from them. They may be imposed on criminally liable offenders in addition to their punishment (cf. Articles 63 et seq.). Such measures must, however, be proportionate to the seriousness of the offences committed, or expected to be committed, by the defendants, as well as to their dangerousness (Article 62 of the Criminal Code).
Preventive detention can be ordered under German law against persons who have committed a criminal offence while acting with full criminal responsibility or with diminished criminal responsibility (see Articles 66 et seq. of the Criminal Code). Initially, a preventive detention order could only be made by a criminal court at the time of the defendant’s conviction, additionally to a term of imprisonment. Under Article 66 of the Criminal Code, this required, in particular, that the criminal court had convicted the defendant of an offence of a certain gravity (as specified in the law) and that, owing to his propensity to commit serious offences, the defendant presented a danger to the general public. Under the law in force prior to 31 January 1998 (Article 67d § 1 of the Criminal Code), the first period of preventive detention executed against a defendant could not exceed ten years. Following a change in the law, that maximum duration was abolished with immediate effect (see, for further details, M.  v.  Germany, no. 19359/04, §§ 49-54, ECHR 2009).
In 2004, a new Article 66b was inserted into the Criminal Code authorising the imposition of subsequent preventive detention on adult offenders. Preventive detention could from then on be imposed also on adult offenders against whom no preventive detention had been ordered by the trial court having found them guilty of certain serious offences. Such orders could be made separately and subsequently, after the trial court’s judgment, if, before the end of enforcement of a term of imprisonment, evidence came to light which indicated that the detainee concerned posed a significant danger to the general public. By a law which entered into force on 1 January 2011, the legislature substantially restricted the conditions under which preventive detention could be ordered subsequently (see for more details B. v. Germany, no. 61272/09, §§ 33-35, 19 April 2012).
In 2008 section 7(2) of the Juvenile Courts Act – the provision at issue in the present case – entered into force, authorising the imposition of subsequent preventive detention also on young offenders (see in more detail paragraphs 54-58 below).
In addition to the above-mentioned more recent reforms of the preventive detention regime in 1998, 2004 and 2008, further legislative amendments were made following this Court’s judgment in the case of M.  v.  Germany (cited above) of 17 December 2009 and the Federal Constitutional Court’s judgment of 4 May 2011 (see paragraphs 68-75 below). These were brought about, in particular, by the adoption of the Reform of Preventive Detention Act (Gesetz zur Neuordnung des Rechts der Sicherungsverwahrung) of 22 December 2010, which included the new Therapy Detention Act (see paragraphs 85-89 below) and entered into force on 1 January 2011, and by the Preventive Detention (Distinction) Act, which entered into force on 1 June 2013 (see paragraphs 78 et seq. below).
As regards the procedure for the execution of measures of correction and prevention in general, Article 463 § 1 of the Code of Criminal Procedure stipulates that the provisions on the execution of terms of imprisonment shall apply mutatis mutandis on the execution of measures of correction and prevention, unless provided otherwise.
Initially, the Juvenile Courts Act did not authorise orders for preventive detention in respect of juveniles (persons aged between fourteen and eighteen) or young adults aged between eighteen and twenty-one (see section 1[2] of the Juvenile Courts Act) to whom the criminal law relating to young offenders was applied. Since 29 July 2004, following a change to section 106 of the Juvenile Court Act, subsequent preventive detention could be ordered against young adults aged between eighteen and twenty-one who were convicted under the ordinary criminal law for adult offenders.
Under the Act on the introduction of subsequent preventive detention for convictions under the criminal law relating to young offenders (Gesetz zur Einführung der nachträglichen Sicherungsverwahrung bei Verurteilungen nach Jugendstrafrecht) of 8 July 2008, which came into force on 12 July 2008, section 7(2) was inserted into the Juvenile Courts Act.
The wording of section 7(2) of the Juvenile Courts Act, as in force up until 31 May 2013, provided:
“If, following the imposition of a sentence applicable to young offenders of at least seven years for ... a felony
against life, physical integrity or sexual self-determination, or
...
through which the victim either suffered grave mental or physical damage or was exposed to the risk of suffering such damage, there is evidence prior to the end of the sentence ... indicating that the convicted person poses a significant danger to the general public, the court may order preventive detention subsequently if a comprehensive assessment of the convicted person, his offence or offences and, on a supplementary basis, his development during the serving of the sentence ... determines that it is very likely that he will again commit offences of the nature described above.”
The Federal Government, when submitting the draft Act on the introduction of subsequent preventive detention for convictions under the criminal law relating to young offenders to Parliament (see Publication of the Federal Parliament (Bundestagsdrucksache) no. 16/6562, p. 1), had argued that recent examples had shown that, like adult offenders, young offenders sentenced under the Juvenile Courts Act could, in exceptional cases, prove to be very dangerous to others even after having served a term of imprisonment of several years. Where young offenders could not be placed in a psychiatric hospital, there was, at that time, no legal basis for remanding them in detention as necessary for the protection of the public.
Under the Preventive Detention (Distinction) Act, which entered into force on 1 June 2013 (see, for further details, paragraphs 76 et seq. below), the legislature substantially restricted the conditions under which preventive detention could be ordered subsequently against young offenders.
Section 105(1) of the Juvenile Courts Act provides that the court shall apply certain provisions of that Act relating to juveniles, particularly section 7 thereof, if a young adult aged between eighteen and twenty-one commits an offence and if, in particular, a comprehensive assessment of the perpetrator’s personality, taking into account his living environment, has shown that the perpetrator only had the moral and intellectual development of a juvenile at the time of his offence.
Section 43(2) of the Juvenile Courts Act provides that in criminal proceedings against young offenders, an expert qualified to examine juveniles should, if possible, be charged with carrying out necessary examinations of the offender.
While proceedings concerning a young offender’s subsequent preventive detention are pending, a court may order the person’s provisional preventive detention (until the relevant judgment on subsequent preventive detention becomes final) if there are weighty reasons to expect that that person’s subsequent preventive detention will be ordered (see section 7(4) of the Juvenile Courts Act, read in conjunction with Article 275a § 5, first sentence, of the Code of Criminal Procedure, in the wording in force at the relevant time under the applicable transitional provision).
Under Articles 304 § 1 and 305 of the Code of Criminal Procedure there is a possibility (which is not subject to any time-limit) of lodging an appeal with the Court of Appeal against a provisional preventive detention order from a Regional Court; under Article 310 of the Code of Criminal Procedure no further appeal lies before the ordinary courts against the Court of Appeal’s decision.
However, a detainee may lodge a fresh request for judicial review of his detention with the competent Regional Court in accordance with Articles 117 et seq. of the Code of Criminal Procedure read in conjunction with Article 275a § 5, fourth sentence, of the Code of Criminal Procedure following the Court of Appeal’s decision. A further appeal lies against the Regional Court’s judicial review decision (Articles 304 et seq. of the Code of Criminal Procedure) with the Court of Appeal.
Under section 7(4) of the Juvenile Courts Act, in the wording in force up until 31 May 2013, read in conjunction with Article 67e of the Criminal Code, the courts were obliged to examine at yearly intervals whether a particular preventive detention order under section 7(2) of the Juvenile Courts Act might be terminated or suspended and a measure of probation applied. In its judgment of 4 May 2011 (see paragraphs 68-75 below), the Federal Constitutional Court ordered that this time-limit be reduced from one year to six months.
Since 1 June 2013, under Article 67d § 2 of the Criminal Code, read in conjunction with section 316f(2) and (3) of the Introductory Act to the Criminal Code, courts have been able to order subsequent preventive detention to continue only if the person concerned suffers from a mental disorder and if, owing to specific circumstances relating to his personality or his conduct, there is a high risk that he will commit the most serious types of violent crimes or sexual offences as a result of that disorder. If these criteria are not met, the court will suspend on probation further enforcement of the detention order and order the supervision of the person’s conduct.
Since 1 June 2013, Article 67d § 2 of the Criminal Code has additionally provided that the court will also suspend on probation the further enforcement of the detention order if it finds that the continuation of the detention would be disproportionate because the person concerned had not been provided, within a maximum six-month time-limit fixed by the court, with sufficient care within the meaning of Article 66c § 1 subparagraph 1 of the Criminal Code (see paragraphs 7980 below). If sufficient care has not been provided, it is for the court to fix that time-limit when it reviews the continuation of the detention and to specify the measures which have to be offered. Suspension of the detention automatically entails supervision of the conduct of the person concerned.
Article 67a of the Criminal Code contains provisions on the transfer of detainees for the implementation of a measure of correction and prevention different from the measure originally ordered in the judgment against them. Under Article 67a § 2, read in conjunction with § 1, a court may subsequently transfer a person in respect of whom preventive detention has been ordered to a psychiatric hospital or detoxification facility if the person’s reintegration into society can thereby be better promoted.
On 4 May 2011 the Federal Constitutional Court delivered a leading judgment on preventive detention following constitutional complaints both of detainees remanded in preventive detention which had been prolonged subsequently beyond the former ten-year maximum period and of detainees – including the applicant in the present case – remanded in subsequently ordered preventive detention under Article 66b § 2 of the Criminal Code or section 7 (2) of the Juvenile Courts Act (file nos. 2 BvR 2365/09, 2  BvR  740/10, 2 BvR 2333/08, 2 BvR 1152/10 and 2 BvR 571/10).
The Federal Constitutional Court’s judgment was adopted after this Court had, on 17 December 2009, delivered a leading judgment in the case of M. v. Germany (cited above) in which it had held that the subsequent extension of Mr M.’s preventive detention beyond the former statutory maximum period of ten years applicable at the time of that applicant’s offence and conviction had breached both Article 5 § 1 and Article 7 § 1 of the Convention.
The Federal Constitutional Court, reversing its previous position adopted notably in its judgment of 5 February 2004 (file no. 2 BvR  2029/01), held that all provisions concerned by the constitutional complaints, both on the subsequent prolongation of preventive detention and on the subsequent ordering of such detention, were incompatible with the Basic Law as they failed to comply with the constitutional protection of legitimate expectations guaranteed in a State governed by the rule of law, read in conjunction with the constitutional right to liberty.
The Federal Constitutional Court further held that all the relevant provisions of the Criminal Code on the imposition and duration of preventive detention were incompatible with the fundamental right to liberty of persons in preventive detention. It found that those provisions did not satisfy the constitutional requirement of differentiating between preventive detention and imprisonment (Abstandsgebot).
The Federal Constitutional Court held that all provisions declared incompatible with the Basic Law remained applicable until the entry into force of new legislation, and until 31 May 2013 at the latest, under additional restrictive conditions. In relation to detainees whose preventive detention had been prolonged subsequently, or ordered subsequently under Article 66b § 2 of the Criminal Code or section 7(2) of the Juvenile Courts Act, the courts responsible for the execution of sentences had to examine without delay whether there was a high risk that the persons concerned, owing to specific circumstances relating to their personality or their conduct, would commit the most serious types of violent crimes or sexual offences and if, additionally, they suffered from a mental disorder within the meaning of section 1(1) of the newly enacted Therapy Detention Act (see paragraph 85 below). As regards the notion of mental disorder, the Federal Constitutional Court explicitly referred to the interpretation of the notion of persons of unsound mind in Article 5 § 1 sub-paragraph (e) of the Convention made in this Court’s case-law (see §§ 138 and 143-56 of the Federal Constitutional Court’s judgment). If the above preconditions were not met, those detainees had to be released no later than 31 December 2011. The other provisions on the imposition and duration of preventive detention could only be applied in the transitional period subject to a strict review of proportionality; as a general rule, proportionality was respected where there was a danger of the person concerned committing serious crimes of violence or sexual offences if released.
In its reasoning, the Federal Constitutional Court relied on the interpretation of Article 5 and Article 7 of the Convention made by this Court in its judgment in the case of M. v. Germany (cited above; see §§ 137 et seq. of the Federal Constitutional Court’s judgment). It stressed, in particular, that the constitutional requirement to differentiate between preventive detention and imprisonment and the principles laid down in Article 7 of the Convention required individualised and intensified therapeutic provision and care for the persons concerned. In line with the Court’s findings in the case of M. v. Germany (cited above, § 129), it was necessary to provide a high level of care by a team of multi-disciplinary staff and to provide the detainees with individualised therapy if the standard therapies available in the institution had no prospects of success (see paragraph 113 of the Federal Constitutional Court’s judgment).
The Federal Constitutional Court confirmed its constant case-law that the absolute ban on the retrospective application of criminal law under Article 103 § 2 of the Basic Law did not cover preventive detention. The latter was a measure of correction and prevention, which was not aimed at punishing criminal guilt, but was a purely preventive measure aimed at protecting the public from a dangerous offender (see paragraphs 100-101 and 141-42 of the Federal Constitutional Court’s judgment). The Federal Constitutional Court noted that the European Court of Human Rights had considered preventive detention to be a penalty within the meaning of Article 7 § 1 of the Convention (ibid., paragraphs 102 and 140). It considered that it was not necessary schematically to align the meaning of the constitutional notion of penalty with that under the Convention. Recourse should rather be had to the value judgments (Wertungen) under the Convention in a result-oriented manner in order to prevent breaches of public international law (ibid., paragraphs  91  and 141 et seq.).
Taking account of the constitutional right to protection of legitimate expectations in a State governed by the rule of law and the value judgments of Article 5 of the Convention, the prolongation of preventive detention beyond the former ten-year maximum period or the subsequent ordering of such detention was only constitutional in practice if, inter alia, the requirements of Article 5 § 1 (e) were met (ibid., paragraphs 143 and 15156). The Federal Constitutional Court expressly referred in that context to the case-law of the European Court of Human Rights, according to which the detention of a person as a mental-health patient would only be lawful for the purposes of Article 5 § 1 (e) of the Convention if effected in a hospital, clinic or other appropriate institution (ibid., paragraph 155).
Having regard to the requirements laid down in the Federal Constitutional Court’s judgment of 4 May 2011, the legislature adopted the Act on the establishment, at federal level, of a difference between the provisions on preventive detention and those on prison sentences (Gesetz zur bundesrechtlichen Umsetzung des Abstandsgebotes im Recht der Sicherungsverwahrung, hereinafter the “Preventive Detention (Distinction) Act”) of 5 December 2012, which entered into force on 1 June 2013.
At the same time, the different German Länder adopted Acts reforming the implementation of preventive detention. These Acts contain detailed rules on the execution in practice of the new preventive detention regime, which should focus on therapeutic provision for detainees and be adapted to the general living conditions as far as possible (see, for the Land of Bavaria, where the applicant is being detained, the Bavarian Preventive Detention Execution Act – Bayerisches Sicherungsverwahrungsvollzugs-gesetz / Gesetz über den Vollzug der Sicherungsverwahrung und der Therapieunterbringung –, and in particular sections 2 and 3 thereof, of 22 May 2013, which entered into force on 1 June 2013; the Act contains a total of 105 sections).
Under the new legislation (see, in particular, Article 66c of the Criminal Code), persons in preventive detention must now be detained in institutions offering them not only conditions more assimilated to general living conditions but, in particular, individual and intensive care for enhancing their willingness to participate in psychiatric, psychotherapeutic or socio-therapeutic treatment tailored to their needs.
Article 66c of the Criminal Code, on the manner in which preventive detention and prior terms of imprisonment are implemented, in so far as relevant, provides as follows:
“1.  Detainees held in preventive detention are placed in institutions which
(1)  offer the detainee, on the basis of a comprehensive examination and a personal treatment plan which is to be updated regularly, care that is
(a)  individual and intensive as well as suitable for raising and furthering his readiness to participate, in particular psychiatric, psychotherapeutic or socio-therapeutic treatment, tailored to the detainee’s needs if standardised offers do not have prospects of success, and
(b)  aimed at reducing the threat he poses to the public to such an extent that the measure may be suspended and probation granted or that it may be terminated as soon as possible,
(2)  guarantee a form of detention that
(a)  places as small a burden as possible on the detainee, complies with the requirements for care under sub-paragraph 1 and is assimilated to general living conditions in so far as security concerns allow, and
(b)  is separate from detainees serving terms of imprisonment in special buildings or departments in so far as the treatment within the meaning of sub-paragraph 1 does not exceptionally require otherwise, and
(3)  in order to attain the aim laid down in sub-paragraph 1 (b)
(a)  grant relaxations in the enforcement of the detention and make preparations for release unless there are compelling reasons not to do so, in particular if there are concrete facts constituting a risk that the detainee might abscond or abuse the relaxations in order to commit considerable offences, and
(b)  allow for follow-up care once at liberty in close cooperation with public or private institutions.”
Under a transitional provision, section 316f(3) of the Introductory Act to the Criminal Code, the new Article 66c of the Criminal Code is also applicable to persons who committed the offence(s) with regard to which preventive detention was ordered prior to 1 June 2013.
In accordance with this judicial and legislative framework, new centres for persons in preventive detention have been constructed, equipped and staffed in the Länder in order to comply with the requirements of establishing a difference between the execution of preventive detention and that of prison sentences and of focusing on the therapy of the detainees. According to the material provided by the Government, which has not been contested by the applicant, twelve new preventive detention centres were built and/or equipped in the different Länder, at total costs exceeding 200 million euros. The detainees are placed in cells (measuring between 14 and 25 m²) which are larger than prison cells and usually include a kitchen unit and a separate bathroom, and may move more freely within the respective centres, which comprise further rooms and outside spaces for therapy, occupational and recreational activities. They may wear their own clothes. In the centres, detainees are, in particular, provided with individualised comprehensive and interdisciplinary therapies, which have been extended as compared to the previous preventive detention regime, including psychotherapeutic conversations aimed at motivating detainees to pursue therapy, offence-specific therapies for violent and sexual offenders and social training courses, either as an individual or a group measure and partly involving external therapists if necessary. New therapeutic staff members were employed in all centres to provide the requisite therapies.
Article 20 of the Criminal Code contains rules on lack of criminal responsibility owing to mental disorders. It provides that a person who, upon commission of an act, is incapable of appreciating the wrongfulness of the act or of acting in accordance with such appreciation owing to a pathological mental disorder, a profound consciousness disorder, a mental deficiency or any other serious mental abnormality, acts without guilt.
Article 21 of the Criminal Code governs diminished criminal responsibility. It provides that punishment may be mitigated if the perpetrator’s capacity to appreciate the wrongfulness of the act or to act in accordance with such appreciation was substantially diminished upon commission of the act owing to one of the reasons indicated in Article 20 of the Criminal Code.
The detention of mentally ill persons is provided for, primarily, in the Criminal Code as a measure of correction and prevention if the detention is ordered in relation to an unlawful act committed by the person concerned. Article 63 of the Criminal Code provides that if someone commits an unlawful act without criminal responsibility (Article 20) or with diminished criminal responsibility (Article 21), the court will order his placement – without any maximum duration – in a psychiatric hospital. A comprehensive assessment of the defendant and his acts must have revealed that, as a result of his condition, he is likely to commit further serious unlawful acts and that he is therefore a danger to the general public.
Furthermore, on 1 January 2011, following the Court’s judgment in the case of M. v. Germany (cited above), the Act on Therapy and Detention of Mentally Disturbed Violent Offenders (Gesetz zur Therapierung und Unterbringung psychisch gestörter Gewalttäter, the “Therapy Detention Act”) entered into force. Under sections 1(1) and 4 of that Act, the civil sections of the Regional Court may order the placement in a suitable institution of persons who may no longer be kept in preventive detention in view of the prohibition on subsequent aggravations in relation to preventive detention. Such detention for therapy may be ordered if the person concerned has been found guilty by final judgment of certain serious offences for which preventive detention may be ordered under Article  66  § 3 of the Criminal Code. The person must also be suffering from a mental disorder as a result of which it is highly likely that, if at liberty, the person would considerably impair the life, physical integrity, personal liberty or sexual self-determination of another person. The person’s detention must be deemed necessary for the protection of the public.
Under section 2(1) of the Therapy Detention Act, institutions suitable for “therapy detention” are only those that can guarantee, by means of medical care and therapeutic provision, adequate treatment of the mental disorder of the person concerned on the basis of an individualised treatment plan aimed at keeping the confinement to a minimum duration (point [1]). Furthermore, the institutions concerned must allow detention to be effected in the least burdensome manner possible for the detainee, taking into account therapeutic aspects and the interests of public security (point [2]). They must be separated, geographically and organisationally, from institutions in which terms of imprisonment are enforced (point [3]). Under section 2(2) of the Therapy Detention Act, as in force since 1 June 2013, institutions within the meaning of Article 66c § 1 of the Criminal Code are also suitable for therapy detention if they comply with the requirements of section 2(1) points (1) and (2) of that Act.
The Federal Constitutional Court interpreted the Therapy Detention Act restrictively, holding that detention under that Act was only possible under the same restrictive conditions under which preventive detention could be ordered or prolonged subsequently (see that court’s decision of 11 July 2013, file nos. 2 BvR 2302/11 and 2 BvR 1279/12, summarised in the case of Bergmann v. Germany, no. 23279/14, §§ 75-76, 7 January 2016; and paragraph 72 above). Detention under that Act only rarely occurred in practice.
As for the interpretation of the notion of “mental disorder” in section 1(1) of the Therapy Detention Act, the Federal Constitutional Court found that in view of the standards flowing from Article 5 § 1 (e) of the Convention, that notion did not require that the disorder was so serious as to diminish or exclude the criminal responsibility of the person concerned for the purposes of Articles 20 and 21 of the Criminal Code (see file no.  2  BvR  1516/11, decision of 15 September 2011, paragraphs 35-36; and file nos. 2  BvR 2302/11 and 2 BvR 1279/12, cited above).
According to the Federal Constitutional Court, specific disorders affecting a person’s personality, conduct, sexual preference and control of impulses were covered by the notion of “mental disorder” in section 1(1) of the Therapy Detention Act. This notion therefore was not limited to mental illnesses which could be treated clinically, but could extend also to dissocial personality disorders of sufficient severity (see file no. 2 BvR 1516/11, cited above, paragraphs 35-40). In line with this Court’s case-law relating to Article 5 § 1 (e) (the court referred, in particular, to Kronfeldner v.  Germany, no. 21906/09, 19 January 2012, and B. v. Germany, cited above) the Federal Constitutional Court found that the detention of a person for being of unsound mind could be justified provided that the detention was effected in an appropriate psychiatric institution, which, in turn, required the mental disorder to be of corresponding intensity (see file nos.  2 BvR 2302/11 and 2 BvR 1279/12, cited above).
Under the Länder legislation relating to public safety and risk prevention, such as the Bavarian Act on the placement in an institution of, and care for, mentally ill persons (Bavarian (Mentally Ill Persons’) Placement Act – Gesetz über die Unterbringung psychisch Kranker und deren Betreuung) of 5 April 1992, the civil courts may order a person’s placement in a psychiatric hospital at the request of the authorities of a town or county if the person concerned is mentally ill or suffers from a mental disorder resulting from an intellectual impairment or addiction and thereby poses a severe threat to public security and order (see sections 1(1), 5 and 7(3) of the Act, read in conjunction with sections 312 point 4 and 313(3) of the Act on proceedings in family matters and matters of non-contentious jurisdiction – Gesetz über das Verfahren in Familiensachen und in den Angelegenheiten der freiwilligen Gerichtsbarkeit). Such an order may only be executed if no measure under Article 63 of the Criminal Code has been taken (section 1(2) of the said Act).
According to statistical material submitted by the Government, which was not contested by the applicant, on 10 May 2010, when the judgment in the case of M. v. Germany (cited above) became final, 102 persons were in subsequently prolonged preventive detention. On 31 March 2017 a total of 51,129 persons were serving a prison sentence in the whole German territory (with a population of some 81 million), and 591 persons were in preventive detention. 41 of the 591 persons in preventive detention were in subsequently ordered or prolonged preventive detention.
As regards the number of persons against whom long terms of imprisonment and preventive detention orders are being executed, according to the Council of Europe Annual Penal Statistics (SPACE I) for 2015, in Germany 2,471 persons were serving prison terms of 10 years or more, whereas 7,603 (figure available for 2014 only) were doing so in France, 9,747 in Italy, 12,012 in Spain and 16,511 in the United Kingdom (see document PC-CP (2016) 6, pp. 87-88, table 7; and SPACE I for 2014, document PC-CP (2015) 7, p. 90, table 7). In addition, 521 persons were under security measures or preventive detention orders in Germany and 540 in Italy (see SPACE I for 2015, document PC-CP (2016) 6, p. 78, table 5.2).
The United Nations Human Rights Committee, in its Concluding observations on the sixth periodic report of Germany, adopted by the Committee at its 106th session (15 October - 2 November 2012, CCPR/C/DEU/CO/6), found the following:
“14.  While welcoming the steps taken by the State party to revise its legislation and practice on post-conviction preventive detention in accordance with human rights standards and noting information that a draft bill addressing the issue is currently before parliament, the Committee is concerned about the number of persons who are still detained in such detention in the State party. It is also concerned about the duration of such a detention in some cases as well as the fact that conditions of detention have not been in line with human rights requirements in the past (arts.  9 and  10).
The State party should take necessary measures to use the post-conviction preventive detention as a measure of last resort and create detention conditions for detainees, which are distinct from the treatment of convicted prisoners serving their sentence and only aimed at their rehabilitation and reintegration into society. The State party should include in the Bill under consideration, all legal guarantees to preserve the rights of those detained, including periodic psychological assessment of their situation which can result in their release or the shortening of the period of their detention.”
The United Nations Committee against Torture, in its Concluding observations on the fifth periodic report of Germany adopted at the fortyseventh session (31 October - 25 November 2011) (CAT/C/DEU/CO/5 of 12 December 2011) found as follows:
“Preventive detention
The Committee takes note of the judgement of the Federal Constitutional Court of 4 May 2011 which has considered that all provisions of the Criminal Code and the Youth Courts Act on the imposition and duration of preventive detention are unconstitutional and welcomes the fact that the federal and Länder authorities have already started to implement the ruling. The Committee nonetheless notes with regret the information that more than 500 persons remain in preventive detention, some of them having been in preventive detention for more than twenty years (arts. 2 and 11).
The Committee urges the State party to:
(a) Adapt and amend its laws on the basis of the Federal Constitutional Court’s decision by 31 March 2013, as requested by the Court, in order to minimize the risks arising from preventive detention; and
(b) Take all necessary actions, in the meantime, to comply with the institutional measures requested by the Court’s decision, in particular with regard to release of persons in preventive detention, reduction of its duration and the imposition thereof, and take into account the provisions of the United Nations Standard Minimum Rules for Non-custodial Measures (the Tokyo Rules) when devising the measures alternative to preventive detention.”
The European Committee for the Prevention of Torture and Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment (CPT) found as follows in its Report to the German Government on the visit to Germany carried out from 20 November to 2 December 2005 (CPT/Inf (2007) 18, 18 April 2007) in respect of the unit for preventive detention in Berlin-Tegel Prison:
“(...)
Even for the other inmates who were apparently coping better with their situation, the lack of staff engagement on the unit was not justifiable. (...) The delegation gained the distinct impression that the staff themselves were not clear as to how to approach their work with these inmates. As well as empowering inmates to take charge of their lives in custody, there is a need for on-going support to deal with indefinite detention, as well as to address the legacy of serious past histories of aberrant behaviour and apparent psychological problems. Psychological care and support appeared to be seriously inadequate; the CPT recommends that immediate steps be taken to remedy this shortcoming.
The difficult question of how to implement in practice a humane and coherent policy regarding the treatment of persons placed in Sicherungsverwahrung needs to be addressed as a matter of urgency at the highest level. Working with this group of inmates is bound to be one of the hardest challenges facing prison staff.
Due to the potentially indefinite stay for the small (but growing) number of inmates held under Sicherungsverwahrung, there needs to be a particularly clear vision of the objectives in this unit and of how those objectives can be realistically achieved. The approach requires a high level of care involving a team of multi-disciplinary staff, intensive work with inmates on an individual basis (via promptly-prepared individualised plans), within a coherent framework for progression towards release, which should be a real option. The system should also allow for the maintenance of family contacts, when appropriate.
The CPT recommends that the German authorities institute an immediate review of the approach to Sicherungsverwahrung at Tegel Prison and, if appropriate, in other establishments in Germany accommodating persons subject to Sicherungsverwahrung, in the light of the above remarks.”
Subsequently, the CPT found as follows in its Report to the German Government on the visit to Germany carried out from 25 November to 3 December 2013 (CPT/Inf (2014) 23, 24 July 2014):
“A. Preventive detention (Sicherungsverwahrung)
(...)
The purpose of the 2013 visit was to review the implementation in practice of the new system of preventive detention and the action taken by the relevant authorities in this connection since the 2010 visit. To this end, the delegation focused on the situation of persons in preventive detention in Baden-Württemberg and Rhineland-Palatinate (...).
(...)
As regards conditions of detention, the delegation was particularly impressed by the newly constructed unit for preventive detention at Diez Prison. All accommodation rooms were spacious (measuring some 18 m² including the sanitary annexe) and well-equipped (including ... a toilet, shower and kitchenette). (...) In addition, there were various association and activity rooms (including a fitness room). It is also praiseworthy that, during the day, inmates could move freely within the building in which the unit is located and could go outside into the open air or to another detention unit whenever they wished (throughout the day and, except at weekends, also in the evening).
At Freiburg Prison, material conditions were generally good in the new unit for preventive detention. All the rooms were in a very good state of repair, spacious (some 14 m² without counting the sanitary annexe) and well-equipped (...). On every floor, there was a large living/dining room (measuring some 50 m² and equipped with tables, chairs, a sofa, a television set, a refrigerator and plants), a kitchen and a laundry room. In addition, the detention unit comprised a large workshop, a computer room and an art therapy room. That said, it is somewhat regrettable that the entire detention unit remained rather prison-like and that the freedom of movement of inmates within the establishment and access to the outdoor exercise yard was more restricted than at Diez Prison (in particular, at weekends). (...)
In this regard, the CPT wishes to recall that, according to the relevant legal provisions, persons in preventive detention are in principle entitled to have unrestricted and unlimited access to the open air outside night lock-up periods. (...)
(...)
As regards the regime and treatment measures (Behandlungsmassnahmen), the delegation was informed that, at Freiburg Prison, all inmates were offered work, individual counselling sessions with a psychologist and a range of recreational activities. In addition, a number of group therapies were provided, including a treatment programme for sex offenders (10 participants, duration 1½ years), social competence training (6 participants, duration six to seven months), art therapy (5 participants), drama and movement therapy (5 participants) and a programme for control of addiction (9 participants). Out of a total of 58 inmates, 48 participated in individual counselling sessions, including 13 who were also involved in one of the above-mentioned group therapies and eleven who were involved in two treatment groups. Seven inmates refused to take part in any therapy, two were new arrivals and not assigned yet to a treatment programme and one was apparently not capable of participating in any treatment programme (due to brain damage). The team of specialised staff comprised three psychologists and four social workers (one on each floor). The delegation was informed that, based on the staff/inmate ratio applied in sociotherapeutic institutions, the unit for preventive detention would need at least six full-time psychologists. (...) The head of the psychology service indicated that, due to the limited staff resources, it was not possible to organise individual therapy on a weekly basis (...), that it was not possible to reach out to those who were lacking any motivation and were unwilling to engage themselves in therapeutic measures and that it was not possible to organise milieu therapy in an effective manner.
The situation appeared to be even more worrying at Diez Prison. Although a comprehensive and detailed concept for the treatment of persons in preventive detention had been prepared by the prison administration of Rhineland-Palatinate in May 2013, the visit revealed a striking discrepancy between theory and practice. Out of 40 inmates, only 24 were receiving individual therapy and only eight were participating in group therapy. It is also regrettable that no efforts had thus far been made by the prison administration to organise group sessions for art, music or drama therapy which may be particularly beneficial for those inmates who are unwilling or unable to participate in any other group therapy programme. Moreover, the delegation noted that attempts had to a large extent failed to motivate inmates to take part in weekly meetings in the living unit, which were organised by staff as part of the ongoing milieu therapy.
The CPT acknowledges that the implementation of the new legislation governing preventive detention was still at an early stage and that it may take some time until all the planned measures are fully implemented in practice. However, there can be no doubt that the existing resources for treatment measures for persons in preventive detention in Baden-Württemberg and Rhineland-Palatinate were insufficient to meet the requirements of the relevant federal and Länder legislation, namely to have a system of programmes focused on therapeutic needs and promoting individual liberty and motivation (therapiegerichtet, freiheitsorientiert and motivationsfördernd). (...)
The Committee recommends that the relevant authorities of Baden-Württemberg and Rhineland-Palatinate redouble their efforts to further develop individual and group treatment measures which are offered to persons in preventive detention at Freiburg and Diez Prisons and increase the number of specialist staff accordingly.
The delegation gained a favourable impression of the therapeutic measures offered to inmates at (...) the socio-therapeutic department at Diez Prison, which accommodated inmates in preventive detention who were considered to be suitable to undergo an intensive therapeutic programme for violent and/or sex offenders. (...)”
The Commissioner for Human Rights of the Council of Europe, Mr Thomas Hammarberg, stated the following in his report of 11 July 2007 on his visit to Germany from 9 to 11 and 15 to 20 October 2006 (see CommDH(2007)14) regarding the issue of what he referred to as “secured custody”, executed in accordance with the provisions applicable at that time:
“8.2. Secured custody
Under German penal law, a criminal who has committed a serious crime such as homicide or rape may be kept under secured custody (Sicherungsverwahrung) after having served his/her prison term. A decision on secured custody can only be taken by the court who issued the original verdict on the basis of expert medical advice. The term of custody is indefinite but subject to court review (...). The possibility of imposing secured custody can either be included in the original verdict itself or it can be ordered shortly before the prison term expires.
The purpose of keeping a person under secured custody has no punitive element but aims at protecting the general public from crimes the perpetrator concerned is likely to commit. Accordingly, prison conditions are adapted to the specific situation and unnecessary restrictions are not applied.
During the visit, the Commissioner discussed the issue of secured custody with several Länder authorities, judges and medical experts. The Commissioner is aware of the public pressure judges and medical experts are exposed to when they make decisions regarding the release of a person who might recommit a serious crime. It is impossible to predict with full certainty whether a person will actually re-offend. Psychiatrists regularly assess the behaviour of an imprisoned person who might act differently outside the prison. In addition, it is difficult to foresee all the conditions that wait for the offender outside the prison.
The Commissioner calls for an extremely considerate application of secured custody. Alternative measures should also be considered before recourse to secured custody is taken. The Commissioner is concerned about the rising number of people deprived of their liberty under secured custody. He encourages the German authorities to commission independent studies on the implementation of secured custody in order to evaluate the measure in terms of protecting the general public and its impact on the detained individual.
The Commissioner is also aware of proposed amendments which would allow the ex post imposition of secured custody on juvenile offenders in extreme cases. The Commissioner urges the German authorities to reconsider such proposals due to their extreme consequences on juvenile offenders. Alternative measures should be applied in the case of juvenile offenders whenever possible.
Furthermore, the Commissioner was informed that persons kept under secured custody regularly experience a loss of future perspective and give up on themselves. This would appear to call for the provision of psychological or psychiatric care. The medical opinion may occasionally be divided on the efficacy of care provided to persons kept under secured custody, yet the possibility of their eventual rehabilitation and release should not be excluded. Accordingly, people held under secured custody should receive adequate medical treatment or other care that addresses their specific situation.”
As regards the measures chosen by other Contracting Parties to the Convention to protect the public from convicted offenders of unsound mind who risk committing further serious offences on their release, the comparative law material before the Court shows the following. Out of the thirty-two Contracting States examined, ten allow for the application of protective measures entailing deprivation of liberty after a criminal sentence. Half of these States allow for such measures to be ordered after the imposition of the sentence. Such measures are imposed by a judicial body. In most of these States, these measures are not classified as “penalties” under domestic law. Facilities for enforcing such measures are quite varied, ranging from special detention facilities to psychiatric hospitals, psychiatric wards in prison and regular detention centres.