The case originated in applications (nos. 65101/16, 73789/16 and 73902/16) against the Kingdom of Spain lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by Spanish nationals, Mr Santiago Arrozpide Sarasola (“the first applicant”), Mr Alberto Plazaola Anduaga (“the second applicant”) and Mr Francisco Múgica Garmendia (“the third applicant”) on 4 November 2016, 23 November 2016 and 21 November 2016 respectively.
The first applicant was represented by Mr I. Urbina Fernandez, a lawyer practising in Vitoria-Gasteiz. The second and third applicants were represented by Ms H. Ziluaga Larreategi, a lawyer practising in Hernani. The Spanish Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Mr R.-A. León Cavero, State Counsel and Head of the Human Rights Department at the Ministry of Justice.
The applicants alleged, in particular, a violation of Articles 6, 7 and 5 § 1 of the Convention.
On 18 January 2017 the Government were given notice of the complaint under Article 6 § 1 concerning right of access to the Constitutional Court and the complaints concerning Articles 7 and 5 § 1 of the Convention. The remainder of the applications was declared inadmissible by the then Vice-President of the Section, sitting in single-judge formation.
The applicants were born in 1948, 1956 and 1953 respectively. The first applicant was detained in Topas Prison when his application was lodged with the Court. The third applicant is detained in Zuera Prison. The second applicant was living in Ciboure (France) when his application was lodged with the Court.
On 30 September 1987 the first applicant was arrested in France.
On 3 October 1987 he was placed in detention in France for belonging to the ETA terrorist organisation.
On 4 July 1990 the Paris Regional Court sentenced him to ten years’ imprisonment on charges of criminal conspiracy, breach of the law on arms and explosives, breach of the Electronic Mail and Communications Code and an offence related to individual or collective action aimed at creating public disorder through intimidation or terror. That conviction concerned offences committed in France in 1987. The first applicant served his sentence up until 3 October 1995, after a full prison term of seven years.
The first applicant then remained in detention in France, for the purposes of extradition, until 21 December 2000, when he was surrendered to the Spanish judicial authorities pursuant to an extradition request.
In Spain, the first applicant was sentenced to more than three thousand years’ imprisonment after eleven separate sets of criminal proceedings before the Audiencia Nacional. He was convicted of several terrorist attacks and murders committed in Spain between 1980 and 1987 by the ETA terrorist organisation, including the booby-trapped car explosion on the Plaza República Dominicana in Madrid on 14 July 1986 (killing twelve Guardia Civil officers and injuring forty-four Guardia Civil officers and seventeen passers-by) and the car-bomb attack on the Hipercor shopping centre in Barcelona on 19 June 1987 (killing twenty-one people and injuring forty-six others).
Once the convictions in Spain had become final by decision of 7 March 2006, the Audiencia Nacional noted that the chronological links between the offences of which she had been convicted made it possible to group them together (acumulación de penas) as provided for in section 988 of the Criminal Procedure Act (Ley de Enjuiciamiento Criminal) in conjunction with Article 70.2 of the 1973 Criminal Code, in force when the offences were committed (see “relevant domestic law and practice” in the case of Del Río Prada v. Spain [GC], no. 42750/09, §§ 24-25, ECHR 2013). The Audiencia Nacional fixed the maximum term to be served by the first applicant in respect of all his prison sentences in Spain combined at thirty years.
On 27 June 2006 an initial calculation was carried out for the purposes of fixing the date on which he would have finished serving his sentence (liquidación de condena), stating that the first applicant would be released on 30 January 2030.
At the first applicant’s request, the period of detention in France for the purposes of extradition (from 3 October 1995 to 21 December 2000) was deducted from the maximum prison term by decision of 24 May 2011 of the Audiencia Nacional. Consequently, the prison authorities recalculated the prison term and fixed the date on which he would have finished serving his sentence for 24 September 2025. That calculation was confirmed by an order issued on 27 September 2011 by the Audiencia Nacional.
Following the judgment delivered by the Court in the case of Del Río Prada, cited above, the first applicant sought and ultimately obtained a recalculation of his prison term, fixing the date of his release on 21 July 2020, which was approved by decision of 28 February 2014. The remissions of sentence to which the applicant was entitled were deducted from the maximum term of thirty years’ imprisonment, rather than from each of the sentences separately (see, as regards the consequences of the Del Río Prada judgment for other convicted persons, Lorenzo Vázquez v. Spain (dec.), no. 30502/12, §§ 19-24, 19 January 2016), for the purposes of determining his release date.
On 25 March 2014 the first applicant requested the deduction of the prison sentence imposed by the French judicial authorities and served in France from the maximum thirty-year term established in Spain. He relied on judgment no. 186/2014 of 13 March 2014 of the Supreme Court, which had accepted the possibility of taking into consideration a sentence served in France for the purposes of grouping together sentences on the basis of Framework Decision no. 2008/675/JAI of the Council of the European Union of 24 July 2008 on taking account of convictions in the Member States of the European Union in the course of new criminal proceedings (“Framework Decision no. 2008/675/JAI”) (see “relevant domestic and EU law and practice”, paragraphs 73-77 and 83 below).
By decision of 2 December 2014 the Audiencia Nacional (first section of the Criminal Division) agreed to deduct the prison term served in France from the maximum term of thirty years’ imprisonment. The Audiencia relied, in particular, on judgment no. 186/2014 delivered by the Supreme Court on 13 March 2014, as well as Framework Decision no. 2008/675/JAI, particularly Article 3 § 1 thereof, which provides that each Member State of the European Union (“the EU”) should ensure that in the course of criminal proceedings against a person, previous convictions handed down against the same person for different facts are taken into account to the extent previous national convictions are taken into account. The Audiencia Nacional took the view that a previous conviction handed down in another Member State should therefore be taken into account in calculating the maximum prison terms provided in criminal law.
The public prosecutor’s office lodged an appeal on points of law with the Supreme Court against that decision, for the purposes of clarifying the law. In the framework of those proceedings, the first applicant requested an application for a preliminary ruling from the Court of Justice of the European Union (“the CJEU”) on the basis of Article 267 of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union. Moreover, he pointed out that allowing the appeal on points of law would violate the principle that only a statute can define offences and lay down penalties, the right to liberty, the right to equality before the law and the right to effective judicial protection.
On 4 December 2014, while the appeal on points of law was pending before the Supreme Court, the Audiencia Nacional recalculated the sentence to be served by the first applicant under the impugned decision. It noted that pursuant to that decision, and taking account of the sentence served in France for the purposes of grouping the sentences together, the applicant ought to have finished serving his sentence on 27 January 2013.
On 21 December 2014 the first applicant was released from prison. He was placed in pre-trial detention on 20 January 2015 in relation to offences committed in 1986 and 1987 for which he had not yet stood trial.
On 10 March 2015 the Supreme Court allowed the appeal on points of law lodged by the public prosecutor’s office for the purposes of clarifying the law. In its judgment, which was delivered and published on 24 March 2015, it held that there had been no need to take account of the sentence served by the first applicant in France for the purposes of grouping sentences together (acumulación de penas). The Supreme Court had followed the same approach as in its leading judgment no. 874/2014 of 27 January 2015, by which the Plenary Criminal Division had decided not to take account of sentences imposed and served in France in tandem with sentences imposed in Spain for the purposes of determining the maximum prison term (see “Relevant law and practice at the domestic and EU levels”, paragraph 69 below).
Referring to the reasoning set out in its leading judgment no. 874/2014 of 27 January 2015, the Supreme Court reiterated all the applicable case-law and legislation concerning the consideration of sentences imposed abroad. It identified three different periods in this regard: the first period up until 15 August 2008, the date of publication of Framework Decision no. 2008/675/JAI; the second extending between that date and the date of publication of Organic Law no. 7/2014 of 12 November 2014 on the exchange of information from police records and taking account of criminal court decisions in the EU, which had come into force on 3 December 2014; and lastly, the third period from the date of publication of the aforementioned organic law to the present day. As regards the first period, the Supreme Court noted that the Spanish courts had only agreed to take account of sentences imposed abroad alongside those imposed in Spain where the sentence imposed abroad was to be served in Spain under an international treaty on the execution of criminal judgments (for example a bilateral treaty or the Council of Europe’s Convention on the Transfer of Convicted persons). On the other hand, it pointed out that when the sentence had already been served abroad, there was no reason to consider it in connection with sentences to be served in Spain for the purposes of implementing the maximum prison term (judgment no. 2117/2002 of 18 December 2002). Concerning the second period (mid-August 2008 to November 2014), the Supreme Court observed that under the Framework Decision itself (Article 3 § 5), it was not compulsory for States to take account of a sentence imposed in another Member State for the purposes of applying the maximum prison term set out in the Penal Code. The court added, however, that as it transpired from its judgment no. 186/2014 of 13 March 2014, in the absence of domestic legislation transposing the Framework Decision or of rules expressly governing this matter, the rules in force should be interpreted in a manner as compatible as possible with the content of European regulations, provided that such interpretation was not contra legem where domestic law was concerned. It pointed out that it was in that context that judgment no. 186/2014, which had been enacted before the transposition of the Framework Decision, had agreed to take into consideration a sentence imposed in France for the purposes of grouping it together with sentences subsequently imposed in Spain. Finally, as regards the third period, the Supreme Court noted that Organic Law no. 7/2014 had incorporated the Framework Decision into Spanish law, while expressly ruling out the effects of sentences imposed in another Member State in calculating the length of sentences given in Spain for offences committed before any sentences handed down by the courts of the other Member State (section 14 (2) of Organic Law no. 7/2014). It considered that under those circumstances, even though the aim was not to apply that law directly, its existence meant that it was no longer possible to interpret Spanish law (Article 70.2 of the Penal Code and section 988 of the Criminal Procedure Act) in the previously accepted sense, that is to say in favour of taking into account sentences imposed in another Member State for the purposes of calculating the maximum prison term. Given that the Spanish State, through the intermediary of its legislature, had expressed its choice in the transposition of the Framework Decision, ruling out any consideration of sentences imposed in another Member State, the previous interpretation was no longer possible, because it was no longer praeter legem but contra legem.
Furthermore, in its judgment, the Supreme Court had considered whether Organic Law no. 7/2014 was compatible with the Framework Decision, and concluded that the exceptions provided for in the Consideration of Sentences imposed in other Member States Act were authorised by the optional exception set out in Article 3 § 5 of the Framework Decision.
The Supreme Court also considered that the new interpretation of the law set out in its judgment no. 874/2014 did not contravene Article 7 of the Convention read in the light of the Court’s case-law. It took the view that the change of interpretation could not be compared with the reversal of case-law which had given rise to the case of Del Río Prada. Firstly, the Supreme Court held that it would be difficult for an interpretation based on such a legal instrument as a Framework Decision, which itself introduced optional exceptions for its transposition, to give rise to legitimate expectations. Secondly, it considered that it was a case of a pre-established case-law or interpretative practice laying down the general rule of consideration of sentences already served abroad. Thirdly, it pointed out that judgment no. 186/2014 of 13 March 2014 had been the first decision in which it had been called upon to interpret the Framework Decision, at a time when the commonly accepted practice of the courts in similar cases had been to refuse to take account of sentences served abroad. Fourthly, the court emphasised that in the absence of any established case-law, the first applicant could not, when he had been serving his prison sentence, have legitimately expected that the sentence already served in France would be taken into consideration for the purposes of applying the maximum prison term in Spain. It concluded that even though the impugned interpretation differed from that adopted in judgment no. 186/2014, that change was not such as to infringe any expectation on the first applicant’s part based on reasonable foreseeability. Moreover, it considered that that foreseeability could never have existed either at the time the first applicant had committed the offences in France (1987) or at the time the decision was taken to group together sentences in Spain (2006), since the Framework Decision had not yet been adopted then and no judicial precedent had supported the taking into account of sentences served abroad. Finally, the Supreme Court held that the first applicant must have known that the Framework Decision had to be implemented at the domestic level, and pointed out that such transposition would determine whether or not sentences imposed in another Member State could be taken into account under the optional exception set forth in Article 3 § 5 of the Framework Decision itself. It noted that ultimately, Spanish law as a whole, including the relevant case-law, had not been drawn up sufficiently precisely for the argument advanced by the applicant to be accepted as established and evident.
As regards the first applicant’s desire to request a preliminary ruling from the CJEU, the Supreme Court held that that was unnecessary in view of the clear wording of Article 3 § 5 of the Framework Decision read in its context and in the light of the procedure for adopting that instrument.
The Supreme Court had adopted its judgment by four votes to one. One judge had appended a dissenting opinion submitting that the exceptions laid down in Organic Law no. 7/2014 on taking account of sentences imposed in another Member State were contrary to the spirit of the Framework Decision and destroyed the very essence of the equivalence objective which that instrument was supposed to enshrine.
On 13 March 2015 the Audiencia Nacional took note of the communication of the Supreme Court judgment and of the latter’s annulment of the 2 December 2014 decision on grouping sentences together in respect of the first applicant, thus rendering inoperative the latest calculation of the prison term to be served. It stated that the first applicant now had to continue serving his prison sentence.
On 10 April 2015 the 24 March 2015 judgment of the Supreme Court was served on the first applicant’s representative. The notice accompanying the judgment stated that the latter was final and could be the subject of an amparo appeal before the Constitutional Court within thirty working days.
On 15 April 2015 the first applicant filed an action (incidente de nulidad) to set aside the judgment of the Supreme Court on the basis of section 241 (1) of the Organic Law on the Judiciary (“LOPJ”) (see “Relevant law and practice at the domestic and EU levels”, paragraph 69 below), alleging in particular an infringement of the principle that only a statute can define offences and lay down penalties, the right to liberty, the right to equality before the law and the right to effective judicial protection. He requested that his action be dealt with under urgent procedure so that he could lodge an amparo appeal before the Constitutional Court within the thirty-day time-limit.
On 25 May 2015 the first applicant requested the withdrawal of his action on the grounds that the Supreme Court, which had delivered the impugned cassation judgment, had already had an opportunity to reply to his allegations of breaches of fundamental rights.
On 26 May 2015 the first applicant lodged an amparo appeal with the Constitutional Court. He relied on Article 14 (equality principle), Article 17 (right to liberty), Article 24 (right to effective judicial protection) and Article 25 (principle that only a statute can define offences and lay down penalties) of the Constitution. He once again requested that the CJEU be invited to give a preliminary ruling. Regarding the requirement of exhaustion of available domestic remedies, the first applicant pointed out that no ordinary appeal lay with the cassation judgment and that the Supreme Court had already determined all the allegations of violations of fundamental rights, redress for which he was now seeking before the Constitutional Court.
At a subsequent date (27 May 2015 according to the applicant and 8 June 2015 according to the Government) the first applicant was served with a decision of the Supreme Court dated 30 April 2015 declaring his action for annulment inadmissible. In that decision the Supreme Court stated that most of the applicant’s complaints had already been assessed in its cassation judgment, and that consequently, pursuant to section 241 (1) LOPJ, the action should be declared inadmissible.
On 24 May 2016 the Constitutional Court declared the amparo appeal inadmissible on grounds of non-exhaustion of existing legal remedies, relying on section 44 (1) (a) of the Organic Law on the Constitutional Court. That court noted that the first applicant had not lodged an action for annulment based on section 241 (1) LOPJ.
The second applicant was arrested in France on 18 November 1990. He was subsequently placed in pre-trial detention.
By judgment of 11 March 1994 the Paris Regional Court sentenced him to seven years’ imprisonment on charges of criminal conspiracy (terrorism), transport of arms and munitions and use of forged documents, in respect of offences committed in French territory in 1990. In its decision the court noted that the applicant was a member of the ETA.
The second applicant served that sentence in France up until the date of his extradition to Spain on 11 March 1996.
By judgment of 31 July 1997 the Audiencia Nacional sentenced the second applicant to a forty-six years’ imprisonment for two attempted murders and damage to property, in connection with a terrorist attack on a bar in Eskoriaza (Guipuscoa Province) on 22 May 1987. The judgment stated that regard would be had to the upper limit set out in Article 70.2 of the 1973 Penal Code, which provided for a maximum prison term of thirty years. The judgment was upheld by the Supreme Court on 12 June 1998 following an appeal on points of law.
On 18 August 1998 an initial calculation was carried out for the purposes of fixing the date on which he would have finished serving his sentence (liquidación de condena), stating that the first applicant would be released on 3 March 2026. The Audiencia Nacional approved that calculation on 27 August 1998.
On 20 March 2014 the second applicant requested that the prison sentence imposed by the French judicial authorities and served in France be taken into account in determining the maximum thirty-year prison term set in Spain. He relied on judgment no. 186/2014 of the Supreme Court of 13 March 2014 and Framework Decision no. 2008/675/JAI of 24 July 2008.
By decision of 2 December 2014 the Audiencia Nacional (first section of the Criminal Division) agreed to deduct the prison term served in France from the maximum term of thirty years’ imprisonment. The Audiencia relied, in particular, on judgment no. 186/2014 delivered by the Supreme Court on 13 March 2014, as well as Framework Decision no. 2008/675/JAI, particularly Article 3 § 1 thereof, which provides that each Member State of the European Union (“the EU”) should ensure that in the course of criminal proceedings against a person, previous convictions handed down against the same person for different facts are taken into account to the extent previous national convictions are taken into account.
The public prosecutor’s office lodged an appeal on points of law with the Supreme Court against that decision, for the purposes of clarifying the law. In the framework of those proceedings, the second applicant requested an application for a preliminary ruling from the CJEU on the basis of Article 267 of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union. Moreover, he pointed out that should the appeal on points of law be allowed, that would violate the principle that only a statute can define offences and lay down penalties, the right to liberty, the right to equality before the law and the right to effective judicial protection.
On 2 December 2014 the Audiencia Nacional recalculated the sentence to be served by the second applicant in accordance with the impugned decision. It noted that pursuant to that decision and having taken into account the sentence served in France for the purposes of grouping sentences together, the applicant should have completed his sentence on 24 August 2013. The Audiencia Nacional also had regard to the ordinary remissions of sentence to which the second applicant was entitled and which had to be deducted from the thirty-year limit.
On 4 December 2014 the Audiencia Nacional confirmed that calculation and the second applicant was released from prison.
On 10 March 2015 the Supreme Court allowed the appeal on points of law lodged by the public prosecutor’s office for the purposes of clarifying the law. In its judgment, which was delivered and published on 24 March 2015, it held that there had been no need to take account of the sentence served by the first applicant in France for the purposes of grouping the sentences together. The Supreme Court had followed the same approach as in its cassation judgment concerning the first applicant (see paragraphs 20-24 above), referring to the approach which it had adopted in its leading judgment no. 874/2014 of 27 January 2015. One judge had appended a dissenting opinion to the judgment.
Also on 10 March 2015, the cassation judgment was communicated to the Audiencia Nacional. The latest calculation of the prison term to be served by the second applicant was rendered inoperative and the previous calculation was reinstated. The Audiencia Nacional therefore fixed the date on which the second applicant would have finished serving his sentence as 16 August 2018 (liquidación de condena), and ordered his recall to prison.
Just as he was to return to prison, the second applicant absconded and remained untraceable. International arrest warrants were issued, and once he had been located, an extradition request was issued to the French State.
On 10 April 2015 the 24 March 2015 judgment of the Supreme Court was served on the second applicant’s representative. The notice accompanying the judgment stated that the latter was final and could be the subject of an amparo appeal before the Constitutional Court, to be lodged within thirty working days.
On 17 April 2015 the second applicant filed an action to set aside the judgment of the Supreme Court on the basis of section 241 (1) of the Organic Law on the judiciary (“LOPJ”), alleging in particular an infringement of the principle that only a statute can define offences and lay down penalties, the right to liberty, the right to equality before the law and the right to effective judicial protection. He requested that his action be dealt with under urgent procedure so that he could lodge an amparo appeal before the Constitutional Court within the thirty-day time-limit.
On 26 May 2015 the second applicant requested the withdrawal of his action on the grounds that the Supreme Court, which had delivered the impugned cassation judgment, had already had an opportunity to reply to his allegations of breaches of fundamental rights.
On the same date the second applicant lodged an amparo appeal with the Constitutional Court. He relied on Article 14 (equality principle), Article 17 (right to liberty), Article 24 (right to effective judicial protection) and Article 25 (principle that only a statute can define offences and lay down penalties) of the Constitution. He once again requested that the CJEU be invited to give a preliminary ruling. Regarding the requirement of exhaustion of available domestic remedies, the first applicant pointed out that no ordinary appeal lay with the cassation judgment and that the Supreme Court had already determined all the allegations of violations of fundamental rights, redress for which he was now seeking before the Constitutional Court.
On 27 May 2015 the second applicant was served with a decision of the Supreme Court dated 30 April 2015 declaring his action for annulment inadmissible. In that decision the Supreme Court stated that most of the applicant’s complaints had already been assessed in its cassation judgment, and that consequently, pursuant to section 241 (1) LOPJ, the action had to be declared inadmissible.
The second applicant was arrested in France on 7 September 2015. It transpires from the case file that the Government adopted an agreement to request his extradition on 9 October 2015.
On 22 June 2016 the Constitutional Court declared the amparo appeal inadmissible on grounds of non-exhaustion of existing legal remedies, relying on section 44 (1) (a) of the Organic Law on the Constitutional Court. That court noted that the first applicant had not lodged an action for annulment based on section 241 (1) LOPJ.
The third applicant was arrested in France on 29 March 1992 in the framework of an operation against the main ETA leaders.
By judgment of 19 June 1997, the Paris Regional Court sentenced him to ten years’ imprisonment on charges, inter alia, of criminal conspiracy, unlawful possession of arms and munitions and use of forged documents, in respect of offences which had been committed in French territory between 1990 and 1992. The third applicant served that sentence in France.
On 8 February 2000 he was surrendered to the Spanish judicial authorities pursuant to an extradition request.
In Spain the third applicant was sentenced to over four thousand seven hundred years’ imprisonment following seventeen separate sets of criminal proceedings before the Audiencia Nacional. He was convicted, inter alia, of several terrorist attacks and murders (twenty-three in all) committed in Spain (Madrid, Zaragoza, Santander and Valencia) between 1987 and 1993.
On 4 December 2012, once the sentences imposed in Spain had become final, the third applicant requested the grouping together of the sentences for the purposes of determining the maximum prison term to be served (thirty years). He did not refer to the sentence served in France.
By decision of 18 November 2013, the Audiencia Nacional noted that the chronological links between the offences of which she had been convicted made it possible to group them together (acumulación de penas) as provided for in section 988 of the Criminal Procedure Act (Ley de Enjuiciamiento Criminal) in conjunction with Article 70.2 of the 1973 Criminal Code, in force when the offences were committed. The Audiencia Nacional fixed the maximum term to be served by the first applicant in respect of all his prison sentences in Spain combined at thirty years.
By decision of 11 April 2014, the Audiencia Nacional approved the calculation of the sentence to be served by the third applicant, taking account of the remissions of sentence to which he was entitled. The date on which he would have finished serving his sentence (liquidación de condena) was fixed for 13 November 2024.
On 30 April 2014 the third applicant requested that the prison sentence which he had served in France be taken into account in determining the maximum thirty-year term. He relied in particular on judgment no. 186/2014 of the Supreme Court and Framework Decision no. 2008/675/JAI.
By decision of 2 December 2014, the Audiencia Nacional (first section of the Criminal Division) agreed to deduct the prison term served in France from the maximum term of thirty years’ imprisonment. The Audiencia relied, in particular, on judgment no. 186/2014 delivered by the Supreme Court on 13 March 2014, as well as Framework Decision no. 2008/675/JAI, particularly Article 3 § 1 thereof, which provides that each Member State of the European Union (“the EU”) should ensure that in the course of criminal proceedings against a person, previous convictions handed down against the same person for different facts are taken into account to the extent previous national convictions are taken into account.
That decision was contested on points of law before the Supreme Court by the public prosecutor’s office for the purposes of clarifying the law, and by the third applicant. The latter requested the consideration of the whole sentence imposed in France (ten years), encompassing the remissions of sentence given, and not exclusively the time actually spent in prison (from 29 March 1992 to 7 February 2000 – seven years and eleven months). In the framework of the cassation proceedings, the third applicant requested that the CJEU be invited to give a preliminary ruling on the basis of Article 267 of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union. Furthermore, he complained of an infringement of the principle that only a statute can define offences and lay down penalties, the right to liberty, the right to equality before the law and the right to effective judicial protection.
On 3 December 2014, the date on which the third applicant would have finished serving his sentence (liquidación de condena) was fixed for 21 March 2022, pursuant to the impugned decision and after deduction of the prison sentence served in France from 29 March 1992 to 7 February 2000. Having regard to the remissions of sentence already granted, deductible from the maximum thirty-year term, his final date of release (licenciamiento definitivo) was fixed for 5 August 2016.
On 23 April 2015 the Supreme Court allowed the appeal on points of law lodged by the public prosecutor’s office for the purposes of clarifying the law, holding that there had been no need to take account of the sentence served by the third applicant in France for the purposes of grouping sentences together. The Supreme Court had followed the same approach as in its judgments concerning the first and second applicants (see paragraphs 20-24 above), while also referring to the approach adopted in its leading judgment no. 874/2014 of 27 January 2015. Two judges appended a dissenting opinion to the Supreme Court’s judgment. The appeal on points of law lodged by the third applicant was dismissed.
On 18 May 2015 the judgment of the Supreme Court was communicated to the Audiencia Nacional and served on the third applicant, who was represented by the same solicitor as the first and second applicants. The notice accompanying the judgment stated that the latter was final and could be the subject of an amparo appeal before the Constitutional Court within thirty working days.
On 20 May 2015 the latest calculation of the prison term to be served by the third applicant was rendered inoperative. The previous calculation was re-validated and updated by taking account of the further applicable remissions of sentence. According to that calculation, approved by the Audiencia Nacional on 21 July 2015, the third applicant would have finished serving his sentence (liquidación de condena) on 14 March 2024.
On 26 June 2015 the third applicant lodged an amparo appeal with the Constitutional Court. He relied on Article 14 (equality principle), Article 17 (right to liberty), Article 24 (right to effective judicial protection) and Article 25 (principle that only a statute can define offences and lay down penalties) of the Constitution. He once again requested that the CJEU be invited to give a preliminary ruling. Regarding the requirement of exhaustion of available domestic remedies, the third applicant pointed out that no ordinary appeal lay with the cassation judgment and that the Supreme Court had already determined all the allegations of violations of fundamental rights, redress for which he was now seeking before the Constitutional Court.
On 22 June 2016 the Constitutional Court declared the amparo appeal inadmissible on grounds of non-exhaustion of existing domestic remedies, relying on section 44 (1) (a) of the Organic Law on the Constitutional Court. That court noted that the first applicant had not lodged an action for annulment based on section 241 (1) LOPJ.
Section 241 (1) of the Organic Law on the Judiciary (“LOPJ”) as amended under the first final provision of Organic Law no. 6/2007 of 24 May 2007 provides:
“As a general rule, actions for the annulment of judicial decisions must be declared inadmissible. In exceptional cases, however, legitimate or potentially legitimate parties may request in writing that judicial decisions be declared null and void on grounds of a violation of a fundamental right secured under Article 53 § 2 of the Constitution, provided that such violation could not have been complained of before the delivery of the judgment or decision terminating the proceedings, and that, in either case, no ordinary or extraordinary remedy lies with the judgment or decision.”
Section 44 (1) (a) of the Organic Law on the Constitutional Court as amended under Organic Law no. 6/2007 of 24 May 2007, provides:
“1. Violations of rights and freedoms which are open to an amparo appeal and which derive immediately and directly from an act or omission on the part of a judicial body may give rise to such an appeal, subject to the following conditions:
(a) that all the legal remedies provided for by procedural rules have been exercised in the practical case, through judicial channels ...”.
The relevant provision of the 1973 Penal Code in force at the time of commission of the offences in issue read:
Article 70
“Where all or some of the sentences (penas) ... cannot be served simultaneously by the convicted person, the follow rules will apply:
Sentences (penas) shall be imposed in accordance with their respective severity such that the convicted person serves them one after another, whereby the execution of a sentence shall begin, as far as possible, when the previous sentence has been served or been the subject of a pardon ...
Notwithstanding the foregoing rule, the maximum prison term (condena) to be served by the convicted person cannot exceed three times the length of the heaviest of the sentences (penas) imposed, the remainder of which shall lapse as soon as the maximum term, which cannot exceed thirty years, has been reached.
The thirty-year maximum shall apply even if the sentences (penas) were imposed in the framework of separate sets of proceedings, provided that the connection between the offences concerned was such that they could have been the subject of one single set of proceedings.”
The relevant provision of the Criminal Procedure Act (Ley de Enjuiciamiento Criminal) in force at the material time provided:
Article 988
“...  where a person found guilty of several criminal offences was convicted in the framework of separate sets of proceedings of offences which could have been covered by the same proceedings pursuant to section 17 of this Act, the judge or court which delivered the latest judgment shall fix, proprio motu or at the request of the public prosecutor’s office or the convicted person, the maximum prison term for serving the sentences imposed in pursuance of Article 70.2 of the Criminal Code. ...”
Framework Decision no. 2008/675/JAI, which was adopted by the Council of the European Union on 24 July 2008 (JO L 220/32, 15/08/2008, pp. 32-34), came into force on 15 August 2008. Article 5 § 1 required EU Member States to take the necessary measures to comply with the provisions of the instrument by 15 August 2010.
The relevant parts of the preamble to the Framework Decision read as follows:
“6. In contrast to other instruments, this Framework Decision does not aim at the execution in one Member State of judicial decisions taken in other Member States, but rather aims at enabling consequences to be attached to a previous conviction handed down in one Member State in the course of new criminal proceedings in another Member State to the extent that such consequences are attached to previous national convictions under the law of that other Member State.
...
The effects of a conviction handed down in another Member State should be equivalent to the effects of a national decision at the pre-trial stage of criminal proceedings, at the trial stage and at the time of execution of the sentence.
Where, in the course of criminal proceedings in a Member State, information is available on a previous conviction in another Member State, it should as far as possible be avoided that the person concerned is treated less favourably than if the previous conviction had been a national conviction.
Article 3(5) should be interpreted, inter alia, in line with recital 8, in such a manner that if the national court in the new criminal proceedings, when taking into account a previously imposed sentence handed down in another Member State, is of the opinion that imposing a certain level of sentence within the limits of national law would be disproportionately harsh on the offender, considering his or her circumstances, and if the purpose of the punishment can be achieved by a lower sentence, it may reduce the level of sentence accordingly, if doing so would have been possible in purely domestic cases.”
The relevant parts of Article 3 of the Framework Decision, titled “Taking into account, in the course of new criminal proceedings, a conviction handed down in another Member State”, provide:
“1.  Each Member State shall ensure that in the course of criminal proceedings against a person, previous convictions handed down against the same person for different facts in other Member States, in respect of which information has been obtained under applicable instruments on mutual legal assistance or on the exchange of information extracted from criminal records, are taken into account to the extent previous national convictions are taken into account, and that equivalent legal effects are attached to them as to previous national convictions, in accordance with national law.
Paragraph 1 shall apply at the pre-trial stage, at the trial stage itself and at the time of execution of the conviction, in particular with regard to the applicable rules of procedure, including those relating to provisional detention, the definition of the offence, the type and level of the sentence, and the rules governing the execution of the decision.
...
If the offence for which the new proceedings being conducted was committed before the previous conviction had been handed down or fully executed, paragraphs 1 and 2 shall not have the effect of requiring Member States to apply their national rules on imposing sentences, where the application of those rules to foreign convictions would limit the judge in imposing a sentence in the new proceedings.
However, the Member States shall ensure that in such cases their courts can otherwise take into account previous convictions handed down in other Member States.”
In its 2 June 2014 report on the implementation by Member States of Framework Decision no. 2008/675/JAI (COM(2014) 312 final), the European Commission noted that six Member States, including Spain, had not yet notified it of the measures transposing the obligations laid down in this instrument. With reference to Article 3 § 5 of the Framework Decision, the European Commission pointed out that the implementation of that provision would have to be assessed in the light of national criminal law principles and procedures related specifically to imposing sentences (e.g. aggregated sentences).
Framework decisions taken on the basis of Title VI of the version of the Treaty on European Union as amended by the Treaty of Amsterdam are binding on Member States as regards the required outcome, leaving to the national authorities the choice of form and methods. Such decisions cannot induce any direct effect (Article 34 § 2 (b) from the Treaty on European Union, in its version amended by the Treaty of Amsterdam). According to the case-law of the CJEU (case of Pupino, judgment of 16 June 2005, C-105/3), the binding nature of such framework decisions imposes on the national authorities, and in particular the national courts, an obligation of interpretation in conformity with national law. In applying national law, a national court called upon to interpret the latter is required to do so as far as possible in the light of the wording and purpose of the framework decision in order to achieve the outcome pursued by that decision. This obligation ceases where national law cannot be the subject of a mode of application leading to a result compatible with that pursued by the framework decision. In other words, the compatible interpretation principle cannot serve as the basis for an interpretation contra legem of national law. That principle nevertheless requires the national court to take account, where appropriate, of national law in its entirety in order to assess the extent to which it can be applied in such a way as to avoid a result contrary to that pursued by the framework decision.
The draft legislation which gave rise to Organic Law no. 7/2014 on the exchange of information from police records and taking account of criminal court decisions in the EU was tabled in Parliament (the Cortes Generales), before the Congress of Deputies, on 14 March 2014. It was published in the Parliament’s Official Gazette on 21 March 2014. The relevant provisions of the bill underwent several amendments during the enactment procedure in the Senate, between September and October 2014. The Organic law was finally approved by the Congress of Deputies, with the Senate’s amendments, on 30 October 2014.
Organic Law no. 7/2014 was enacted on 12 November 2014 and published in the State Official Journal the next day. It came into force on 3 December 2014. It transposed Framework Decision no. 2008/675/JAI into Spanish law (see paragraphs 73-75 above).
The relevant parts of the explanatory memorandum to Organic Law no. 7/2014 read as follows:
“The regulations set out in Title II of this law presuppose official recognition of the principle of equivalence between judgments delivered within the European Union by taking them into account in subsequent proceedings held following the commission of fresh offences. That means that, like previous convictions handed down in Spain, sentences imposed in another Member State must be taken into account [at whatever stage], whether during the preliminary phase of criminal proceedings, the criminal proceedings themselves, or the sentence-enforcement phase. The effects of taking such sentences into account are confined to those attaching to a conviction handed down in Spain, and are, moreover, subject to the condition that the conviction in another Member State was handed down in respect of acts punishable under Spanish law as in force at the date of their commission.
Recognition of the effects concerns not only the time of imposition of the sentence, but also the decisions which must be taken during the investigatory and sentence-enforcement phases, for example decisions on the pre-trial detention of a suspect, on the amount of bail, on the calculation of the sentence, on a stay of execution or a revocation of such stay, or on release on licence.
With this general principle, in order to reinforce legal certainty, the law lists, pursuant to the provisions and options laid down in the Framework Decision, the cases in which such convictions [handed down in another Member State] cannot be taken into account: where previous convictions in Spain or decisions given with a view to their enforcement must be reconsidered; where convictions likely to be handed down at a later date in Spain are given in respect of offences committed before the sentence could be imposed by the other Member State; and in cases of decisions relating to the determination of the maximum prison term in respect of sentences imposed pursuant to section 988 of the Criminal Procedure Act, where one such sentence is incorporated.
...”
The relevant provisions of Organic Law no. 7/2014 read as follows:
Article 14
Legal effects attaching to previous convictions under the new criminal
procedure
“1. Previous final convictions handed down in other Member States in respect of a person for a different offence will, on the occasion of fresh criminal proceedings, the same legal effects as those attaching to a conviction handed down in Spain, subject to the following conditions:
(a) the convictions must have been handed down for acts which were punishable under Spanish law as in force at the time of their commission;
(b) sufficient information on the convictions must have been obtained under the instruments applicable to legal mutual assistance or the exchange of information from police records.
Notwithstanding the provisions of the previous sub-paragraph, final convictions handed down in other Member States will have no effect on the following, nor can they lead to their revocation or reconsideration:
(a) final judgments delivered previously by Spanish judges and courts, and decisions adopted for their enforcement;
(b) convictions handed down during subsequent proceedings conducted in Spain for offences committed before any conviction has been handed down by the courts in the other Member State;
(c) decisions which have given or are to be given in pursuance of the provisions of section 988 (3) of the Criminal Procedure Act, fixing the maximum prison term for grouping together sentences, including any conviction of the type set out in sub-paragraph (b) above.
...”
Single additional provision. Convictions prior to 15 August 2010
“Account will not be taken, for the purposes of the present law, of convictions handed down by a court in any Member State of the European Union prior to 15 August 2010.”
By judgment no. 2117/2002 of 18 December 2002, the Supreme Court rejected the possibility of taking into account a sentence already served in France for the purposes of implementing the maximum prison term in Spain. It considered that the various offences which had been committed in France and Spain could not possibly have been the subject of the same criminal proceedings, since they had occurred in different national territories, subject to the sovereignty of different States, and had consequently been prosecuted before different national courts.
By judgment no. 186/2014 of 13 March 2014 the Supreme Court (a five-judge criminal division) considered the possibility of grouping together a sentence already served in France with subsequent sentences imposed in Spain for different offences, for the purposes of implementing the maximum prison term established by the Spanish Penal Code (thirty years). It accepted that possibility, in the light of Framework Decision no. 2008/675/JAI and in the absence, at the time, of domestic legislation transposing that Framework Decision or rules explicitly governing that subject matter. The Supreme Court held as follows:
“... the existence of a European area of freedom, security and justice, which, in a way, implies separate consideration of specific aspects relating to the exercise of sovereignty. Accordingly, Framework Decision no. 2008/675/JAI of the Council of the European Union, which was adopted on 24 July 2008 and therefore subsequently to our judgment of 18 December 2002, stated that its aim was to establish a minimum obligation on Member States to take outside of convictions handed down in other Member States. Article 3 of the Framework Decision provided: ‘1. Each Member State shall ensure that in the course of criminal proceedings against a person, previous convictions handed down against the same person for different facts in other Member States, in respect of which information has been obtained under applicable instruments on mutual legal assistance or on the exchange of information extracted from criminal records, are taken into account to the extent previous national convictions are taken into account, and that equivalent legal effects are attached to them as to previous national convictions, in accordance with national law. 2. Paragraph 1 shall apply at the pre-trial stage, at the trial stage itself and at the time of execution of the conviction, in particular with regard to the applicable rules of procedure, including those relating to provisional detention, the definition of the offence, the type and level of the sentence, and the rules governing the execution of the decision.’
Regardless of the Spanish State’s diligence, as an EU Member State, in implementing the provisions of Article 5.1 of the aforementioned Framework Decision (‘1. Member States shall take the necessary measures to comply with the provisions of this Framework Decision by 15 August 2010’), the fact is that in the absence of rules explicitly governing the present subject matter in any categorical manner, the current regulations must be interpreted in a manner as compatible as possible with the content of European regulations, the transposition of which into the domestic system is an obligation entered into by the Spanish State on becoming a member of the European Union.
Therefore, there is nothing to prevent taking into account the judgment delivered in France for the purposes of grouping sentences together.”
In accordance with the approach thus followed by the Supreme Court in its judgment no. 186/2014, some sections of the Criminal Division of the Audiencia Nacional have decided, in calculating the maximum thirty-year prison term, to deduct sentences imposed and served in France. The decisions given by that court concerning the three applicants in the present case followed the same reasoning (see paragraphs 16, 39 and 61 above). Those decisions did not become final, since they were set aside by the Supreme Court following the appeals on points of law lodged by the public prosecutor’s office for the purposes of clarifying the law. Moreover, it transpires from the information supplied by the parties that in three different cases concerning other defendants, the sectional decisions in their favour were not the subject of an appeal on points of law and therefore became res judicata (two decisions of 9 June 2014 and one decision of 24 November 2014).
By judgment no. 874/2014 of 27 January 2015, the Plenary Criminal Division of the Supreme Court (comprising fifteen judges) discounted the possibility of grouping together sentences imposed and served in another EU Member State with sentences handed down in Spain for the purposes of determining the maximum prison term. The Division’s reasoning largely served as the basis for that adopted by the Supreme Court in its judgments on points of law relating to the three applicants in the instant case. The main lines of that reasoning are summarised in the “Facts” section on the first applicant (see paragraphs 20-24 above). Judgment no. 874/2014 was adopted by a majority of nine votes to six. Four judges appended dissenting opinions.
By judgment of 19 December 2013 (no. 216/2013) the Constitutional Court (Plenary formation) clarified the criteria for determining when an action for annulment was a judicial remedy which had to be exercised by a litigant before lodging an amparo appeal, pursuant to section 44 (1) (a) of the Organic Law on the Constitutional Court. It held that such an action did not have to be lodged where the judicial authorities had already had an opportunity to decide on the fundamental rights subsequently relied on in the framework of the amparo appeal. The Constitutional Court considered that the aim of the rule on exhaustion of available domestic remedies was to preserve the subsidiary nature of the amparo remedy, so that the ordinary courts could consider and, where appropriate, remedy the alleged fundamental rights violations. The Constitutional Court pointed out that this reasoning also applied in cases where the rights violation had originated in a single judicial decision given by a court at first instance and where the subject matter of the dispute before that court had entailed assessing the alleged violation of the fundamental right in issue. In that case, the aim of bringing an action for annulment would merely be to seek a re-examination of the merits of the decision by the same court, on the basis of arguments analogous to those used during the main proceedings.
Furthermore, by reasoned decision (auto) of 20 September 2016, the Constitutional Court (plenary formation) determined the amparo appeal lodged against judgment no. 874/2014 of the Supreme Court. The court held that the Supreme Court had not retroactively applied Organic Law no. 7/2014 – which had entered into force after the applicant’s request to group his sentences together – but had mentioned it solely in order to back up its interpretation of Framework Decision no. 2008/675/JAI, particularly in relation to the exception set out in Article 3 § 5 of that legal instrument. As regards the allegation of possible retroactive application of case-law unfavourable to the convicted person, the Constitutional Court drew a distinction between the case in question and Del Río Prada. It noted that when the total sentence to be served had been fixed in 2007 and throughout the execution of the sentence in Spain, the applicant had obtained no decision in favour of taking account of the sentence served in France. The court therefore considered that criminal legislation had been applied clearly and in complete conformity with existing judicial practice, without ever encouraging the applicant to hope that the sentence which he had served in France would be taken into account in determining the maximum prison term in Spain. It noted that the only requests which the applicant had submitted for such an eventuality had been in 2013, that is to say after the 2007 decision to group decisions together, and they had all been dismissed. It consequently considered that in the instant case there had been no retroactive application of an unfavourable interpretation inconsistent with the judicial practice applicable at the time when the sentence had been determined. The Constitutional Court noted that the applicant had only claimed that a possible interpretation of a previous legal rule, that is to say the rule laid down in judgment no. 186/2014 of the Supreme Court, had been applied to him retroactively. In fact, under the principle of equality before the law, it had noted that that interpretation – adopted by a five-judge section of the Supreme Court the first time that court had been called upon to adjudicate on the Framework Decision – had remained isolated and been rejected a few months later by the Plenary Supreme Court in its judgment no. 874/2014. Moreover, the Constitutional Court observed that the detailed reasoning of that judgment had not been based on an arbitrary or unreasonable interpretation of the applicable legislation. For all those reasons it declared the amparo appeal inadmissible, since there had manifestly been no violation of the fundamental rights relied upon (including the principle that only a statute can define offences and lay down penalties, the right to liberty, the right to equality before the law, the right to equality before the law).
That decision gave rise to two dissenting opinions by four judges of the Constitutional Court. In one dissenting opinion, two judges held that the Constitutional should have declared the appeal admissible and adjudicated on the merits with a judgment. In the other dissenting opinion, two judges also held that there had been a violation of the right to liberty and the principle that only a statute can define offences and lay down penalties, given that, in their view, the applicant had suffered the retroactive application of an unfavourable rule extending his prison term.
Article 1 of the Civil Code provides:
“1. The sources of the Spanish legal system are the law, custom and the general principles of law.
...
Case-law complements the legal system with the doctrine regularly established by the Supreme Court in its interpretations and applications of the law, custom and the general principles of law. ...”