The case originated in an application (no. 24552/02) against the  lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Russian national, Ms Yelena Yuryevna Melnikova (“the applicant”), on 20 May 2002.
The Russian Government (“the Government”) were represented by Mr P. Laptev, Representative of the  at the European Court of Human Rights.
The applicant alleged, in particular, that her pre-trial detention was unlawful and unreasonably long.
By a decision of 30 June 2005, the Court declared the application partly admissible.
The applicant and the Government each filed further written observations (Rule 59 § 1). The Chamber having decided, after consulting the parties, that no hearing on the merits was required (Rule 59 § 3 in fine), the parties replied in writing to each other's observations.
The applicant was born in 1967 and lives in .
On 15 October 1996 the applicant was arrested and detained on suspicion of murder. On 6 June 1997 the criminal proceedings were terminated and she was released.
On 17 October 2001 a new set of criminal proceedings was initiated against the applicant and another person. This time she was suspected of fraud.
On 13 December 2001 the applicant was put on a list of persons wanted by the police.
On 5 January 2002 the applicant was arrested. The reasons for her arrest indicated in the arrest warrant included preventing her from committing further offences, absconding from the investigation and interfering with the course of justice.
On 8 January 2002 the investigation authorities charged her, as a principal offender, with fraud and remanded her in custody pending trial for the reasons that, having been earlier placed on the wanted list, she might abscond and interfere with the course of justice. Later the investigation authorities decided to carry out a psychiatric examination of the applicant. On 19 February 2002 she was transferred from the remand prison to a psychiatric hospital. The preventive measure was changed from detention to an obligation not to leave the place without permission.
On 22 March 2002, after the psychiatric examination, the prosecutor ordered to re-detain the applicant on the ground of the gravity of charges.
On 1 April 2002 the investigator applied to the prosecutor for extension of the applicant's detention on the grounds that she was charged with having committed grave offences, had no permanent residence in  and “did not take voluntarily any measure to compensate the damage caused to the victims”. The prosecutor extended the applicant's detention until 17 April 2002.
On 8 April 2002 the applicant and the co-accused were informed that the preliminary investigation was complete. On 10 April 2002 they began studying the case file.
On 17 April 2002 the investigator applied to the prosecutor for extension of the applicant's detention until 5 May 2002 on the ground of the gravity of charges. The prosecutor granted the extension until 5 May 2002.
On 29 April 2002 the investigator applied to the prosecutor for extension of the applicant's detention until 5 June 2002 in order to let her study the case file. The investigator stated that she should remain in detention because of the gravity of the charges and lack of permanent residence in  and that, if released, she might abscond and put pressure on the victims and witnesses.
On 30 April 2002 the prosecutor extended the applicant's detention until 5 June 2002.
On an unspecified date the applicant filed an application for release pending trial on the grounds, inter alia, of her state of health and two dependent children.
On 6 May 2002 the Oktyabrskiy District Court of Penza dismissed the application. The court held:
“The offence the accused is charged with belongs to the category of “serious” [offences]. Taking into account the social danger of the offence, the preventive measure applied to [Ms] Melnikova is lawful and well-grounded. At present, there are no reasons to change it.”
The applicant appealed.
On 31 May 2002 she finished studying the case file.
On 5 June 2002 the case was transmitted to court.
On the same date the  quashed the decision of 6 May 2002 and remitted the case for a fresh examination by the same court.
On an unspecified date the applicant again filed an application for release pending trial, referring to her two dependent children.
On 24 June 2002 the Leninskiy District Court of Penza dismissed the application. Relying on Article 261 of the 1960 Code of Criminal Procedure, the court held:
“... the application [for release] ... must be dismissed, because ... the detention ... was lawfully applied to the applicant by the investigator and authorised by the prosecutor, and because there was a risk that she might abscond.
It can be seen from the case file that before her arrest [Ms] Melnikova was on the wanted list, furthermore, she does not have a permanent residence in . The investigator's order to apply the preventive measure was lawfully authorised by the prosecutor because, in accordance with the legislation in force, the preventive measure may be applied by the court after 1 July 2002. At present there are no grounds for modification of the preventive measure in respect of [Ms] Melnikova.”
On 6 November 2002, in the course of the trial, the applicant sought to declare certain evidence inadmissible and again filed an application for release.
On the same date the Leninskiy District Court of Penza, relying on Articles 235 and 271 of the 2001 Code of Criminal Procedure, dismissed the application on the following grounds:
“ ... [the applicant] is charged with serious offences, has neither a permanent residence nor a job in , the preventive measure was applied in accordance with the law, there are no grounds for its modification and release [of the applicant]...”
On an unspecified date the applicant's lawyer requested the court to remit the case to the investigating authorities for the charges to be
On 28 November 2002 the Leninskiy District Court of Penza returned the case to the prosecutor for the bill of indictment to be amended but refused to release the applicant. The court held in particular:
“... as [Ms] Melnikova is accused of having committed serious offences ... the court finds no grounds for modification of the preventive measure...”
On 6 December 2002 the Leninskiy District Court of Penza extended the applicant's detention until 10 January 2003 relying on the gravity of the offence with which the applicant was charged.
The applicant appealed against the decisions of 28 November and 6 December 2002 arguing, inter alia, that she had two dependent children and, therefore, if released she could not abscond.
On 18 December 2002 the  dismissed the appeal. The court held:
“The [trial] court rightfully refused to release [Ms] Melnikova, because during the preliminary investigation it was decided to detain her and because less than six months had elapsed between the transmission of the case to the court and the ruling of 28 November 2002, and also because [she] was charged with serious offences there were no reasons to apply a different preventive measure.”
On 25 December 2002 the prosecutor remitted the case for additional investigation.
On 26 December 2002 the investigator accepted the case for additional investigation. On the same date the Zheleznodorozhniy District Court of Penza ordered extension of the applicant's detention until 28 February 2003. The applicant appealed.
On 31 December 2002 the  dismissed the appeal. The court held:
“[Ms] Melnikova faces serious charges and has sought to evade investigation. If released, she may abscond and obstruct the establishment of the truth. In the present case it is necessary to correct the defects [of the investigation] discovered in the course of the trial, to carry out investigative acts for this purpose, to submit a final bill of indictment and to familiarise the accused with the file. The judge was right not to find grounds for the cancellation of detention as a preventive measure in respect of [Ms] Melnikova.”
It appears that on 22 February 2003 the case was referred to the court, and the applicant remained in custody until the delivery of the sentence.
On 23 May 2003 the Leninskiy District Court of Penza convicted the applicant of fraud and sentenced her conditionally to 5 years' imprisonment.
The relevant Articles of the old CCrP provide:
Article 11 (1). Personal inviolability
“No one may be arrested otherwise than on the basis of a judicial decision or a prosecutor's order. [...]”
Article 89 (1). Application of preventive measures
“When there are sufficient grounds for believing that an accused person may evade an inquiry, preliminary investigation or trial or will obstruct the establishment of the truth in a criminal case or will engage in criminal activity, or in order to secure the execution of a sentence, the inquirer, the investigator, the prosecutor or the court may apply one of the following preventive measures in respect of the accused: a written undertaking not to leave a specified place, a personal guarantee or a guarantee by a public organisation, or taking into custody. [...]”
Article 91. Circumstances to be considered when applying a preventive measure
“When the need for application of a preventive measure is considered and the type of measure is chosen... the circumstances to be taken into account shall include... the gravity of the charges brought and the personality of the suspect or the accused, occupation, age, health, family status and other circumstances.”
Article 92. Order or decision to apply a preventive measure
“A preventive measure shall be applied under an order made by an inquirer, an investigator, or a prosecutor, or a reasoned decision given by a court, which shall specify the offence of which the person is suspected or accused and the grounds for application of the preventive measure. The person concerned shall be informed of the order or decision and at the same time the person shall be provided with explanations concerning the procedure for appealing against the preventive measure applied.
A copy of the order or the decision on the application of the preventive measure shall be immediately handed to the person concerned.”
Article 96. Taking into custody
“Taking into custody as a preventive measure shall be effected in accordance with the requirements of Article 11 of this Code in respect of a person charged with criminal offences for which the law prescribes a penalty in the form of deprivation of liberty for a period of more than two years. In exceptional cases, this preventive measure may be applied in criminal matters for which a penalty in the form of deprivation of liberty for a period of less than two years is prescribed by law. [...]”
Article 97. Time-limits for pre-trial detention
“A period of detention during the investigation of offences in criminal cases may not last longer than two months. This time-limit may be extended by up to three months by a district or municipal prosecutor ... if it is impossible to complete the investigation and there are no grounds for altering the preventive measure. A further extension up to six months from the day of taking into custody may be effected only in cases of special complexity by a prosecutor of a subject of the  ...
An extension of the time-limit for such detention beyond six months shall be permissible in exceptional cases and solely in respect of persons accused of committing grave or very grave criminal offences. Such an extension shall be effected by a deputy of the Prosecutor General of the Russian Federation (up to one year) and by the Prosecutor General of the Russian Federation (up to one year and a half) [...].”
Article 101. Cancellation or modification of a preventive measure
“A preventive measure shall be cancelled when it ceases to be necessary, or else changed into a stricter or a milder one if the circumstances of the case so require. The cancellation or modification of a preventive measure shall be effected by a reasoned order of the person carrying out the inquiry, the investigator or the prosecutor, or by a reasoned court decision after the case has been transferred to a court.
The cancellation or modification, by the inquirer or by the investigator, of a preventive measure chosen on the prosecutor's instructions shall be permissible only with the prosecutor's approval.”
Article 222. Issues to be decided when scheduling a hearing
“When scheduling a hearing a judge shall decide in respect of each accused:
...5) whether the preventive measure applied to the accused is subject to modification or cancellation . [...]”
Article 223.1. Scheduling of a hearing
“The judge ... shall deliver a ruling on scheduling of a hearing...
The decision concerning scheduling of a hearing should be taken within 14 days after the case has been committed for trial is the accused is in custody...”
Article 239.1. Time-limits for detention of the accused during the trial
“The term of detention of a person whose case is before a court may not exceed six months from the date when the case is transmitted to the court. In instances where detention as a preventive measure is applied by a court according to the procedure provided [in the present Code] the above-mentioned term starts to run from the moment when the accused is taken into custody.
If there is evidence that the release of the accused will significantly impede [the examination of the case] the court may, either of its own motion or upon the prosecutor's request, extend the term of the [detention] but for no more than three months. Such decision shall be taken before the expiry of the term of the detention provided in paragraph 1 of the present Article.
[...]
The provisions of the present Article are not applicable to persons charged with particularly serious offences.”
“The court delivers rulings concerning all the questions examined in the hearing.
Rulings concerning ... application, modification or cancellation of a preventive measure ... are delivered by the court in the consultation room and are issued as separate documents, signed by the whole composition of the court.
[...]
Ruling delivered by the court during the hearing shall be read out. [...]”
Under Article 220-1, complaints about a decision to take the suspect into custody as a preventive measure should be lodged by the detainee or his representative with a court. By Article 220-2, judicial review of the lawfulness and validity of an arrest should be conducted by a judge in camera at the place of detention within three days of receipt of the material justifying the arrest.
The relevant Articles of the new CCrP provide
Article 97. Grounds for applying a preventive measure
“1. An inquirer, an investigator, a prosecutor or a court within their competence may apply to an accused one of the preventive measures provided for in the present Code when there are sufficient grounds to believe that the accused:
1) will evade an inquiry, preliminary investigation or trial;
2) may continue criminal activity;
3) may threaten a witness or other participants in the criminal proceedings, destroy evidence or otherwise interfere with the course of the criminal proceedings.
A preventive measure may also be applied in order to secure enforcement of the sentence.”
Article 99. Circumstances to be considered in applying a preventive measure
“When the need for application of a preventive measure is considered and the type of measure is chosen ... the circumstances to be taken into account shall include the gravity of the charges brought, the personality of the accused, his age, health, family status, occupation and other circumstances.”
Article 101. Order or decision to apply a preventive measure
“1. A preventive measure shall be applied under an order made by an inquirer, an investigator, a prosecutor or a judge, or a decision given by a court, which shall specify the offence of which the person is suspected or accused and the grounds for application of the preventive measure.
A copy of the order or decision on the application of the preventive measure shall be handed to the person concerned and to his lawyer or legal representative upon their request.
At the same time the procedure for appealing against application of the preventive measure... shall be explained to the person concerned.”
Article 108. Taking into custody
“1. Taking into custody as a preventive measure shall be effected pursuant to a court decision in respect of a person suspected or accused of committing criminal offences for which the law prescribes a penalty in the form of deprivation of liberty for a period of more than two years when application of a milder preventive measure is impossible. ...the judge's decision shall specify concrete factual circumstances which constitute the grounds for such decision. In exceptional cases, this preventive measure may be applied in criminal matters for which a penalty in the form of deprivation of liberty for a period of less than two years is prescribed by law, provided that:
Article 109. Time-limits for pre-trial detention
“1. A period of detention during the investigation of criminal offences may not last longer than two months.
If it is impossible to complete a preliminary investigation within two months and if there are no grounds for modification or cancellation of the preventive measure this time-limit may be extended up to six months by a judge of a district or garrison court of the requisite level according to the procedure provided in Article 108 of the present Code. A further extension of this term up to 12 months may be effected in respect of persons accused of committing grave or particularly grave criminal offences only in cases of special complexity of the criminal case and provided there are grounds for application of this preventive measure by a judge of the same court upon application of the investigator filed with the consent of a prosecutor of a subject of the Russian Federation or a military prosecutor of equal status.
A term of detention beyond 12 months may be extended to 18 months only in exceptional cases and in respect of persons accused of committing grave or particularly grave criminal offences by [a judge] upon application of an investigator filed with the consent of the Prosecutor General of the Russian Federation or his deputy.
Further extension of the time-limit is not allowed. [...]
Article 110. Cancellation or modification of a preventive measure
“1. A preventive measure shall be cancelled when it ceases to be necessary, or else changed into a stricter or a milder one if the grounds for its application ... change.
The cancellation or modification of a preventive measure shall be effected by an order of the person carrying out the inquiry, the investigator, the prosecutor or the judge or by a court decision.
A preventive measure applied at the pre-trial stage by the prosecutor or by the investigator or the inquirer upon his written instructions may be cancelled or changed only with the prosecutor's approval.”
“In respect of a criminal case [received by the court] the judge has to decide in respect of each accused the following:
...
3)  whether the preventive measure applied is subject to cancellation or modification [.]
[...]”
Article 255. Decision concerning a preventive measure
“1. In the course of a judicial hearing the court may apply, change or cancel a preventive measure in respect of the defendant.
If taking into custody is applied to the defendant as a preventive measure, the term of detention from the date when the criminal case is submitted to the court and until the sentence is delivered may not exceed six months except as provided in paragraph 3 of this Article.
...[U]pon expiry of six months from the date when the criminal case was submitted to it, the [trial] court may extend the term of detention... only in respect of a criminal case concerning grave and particularly grave criminal offences and for not more than three months each time.
A court decision on extension of the term of detention of the defendant may be appealed against. The appeal does not suspend the criminal proceedings.”
“1. The judge, upon a party's application or upon his own initiative, returns the case to the prosecutor for elimination of the obstacles for its examination by the court, if:
1)  the bill of indictment ... was drawn up in breach of the provisions of the present Code, which exclude the possibility of rendering a judgment ... on its basis;
2)  the accused has not been provided with a copy of ... the bill of indictment;
3)  it is required to draw up a bill of indictment ... in a case that has been transmitted to the court together with an order to apply preventive measures of medical character.
In instances provided for in the first part of the present article the judge obliges the prosecutor to rectify the breaches within five days.
When returning the case to the prosecutor the judge shall decide on application of the preventive measure to the accused.”
On 22 March 2005 the Constitutional Court of the  adopted Ruling no. 4-П in respect of a complaint concerning the de facto extension of pre-trial detention after the transmittal of the case-file from the prosecution authorities to the trial court. It found that the challenged provisions of the new CCrP complied with the Constitution of the . However, their practical interpretation by the courts may have contradicted their constitutional meaning. In part 3.2. of the Ruling the  held:
“The second part of Article 22 of the Constitution of the  provides that [...] the detention is permitted only on the basis of a court order [...]. Consequently, if the term of detention, as defined in the court order, expires, the court shall decide on the extension of the detention, otherwise the accused person should be released [...].
These rules are common for all stages of criminal proceedings, and also cover the transition from one stage to another. [...] The transition of the case to another stage does not automatically put an end to the preventive measure applied at previous stages.
Therefore, when the case is transmitted by the prosecution to the trial court, the preventive measure applied at the pre-trial stage [...] may continue to apply until the expiry of the term, for which it has been set in the respective court decision [imposing it] [...]
[Under to Articles 227 and 228 of the Code of Criminal Procedure] a judge, after having received the criminal case concerning a detained defendant, should, within 
14 days, set a hearing and establish “whether the preventive measure applied should be lifted or changed”. This wording implies that the decision to detain the accused or extend his detention, taken at the pre-trial stage, may stand after the completion of the pre-trial investigation and transmittal of the case to the court, only until the end of the term, for which the preventive measure has been set.
The prosecution, in its turn, while approving the bill of indictment and transferring the case-file to the court, should check whether the term of detention has not expired and whether it is sufficient to allow the judge to take a decision [on further detention of the accused pending trial]. If by the moment of transferral of the case-file to the court this term has expired, or if it appears to be insufficient for allowing the judge to take a decision [on detention], the prosecutor, pursuant to Articles 108 and 109 of the Code of Criminal Proceedings, [should] request the court to extend the period of detention.”
Forensic medical examination
“If forensic medical examination or forensic psychiatric examination requires inpatient supervision, the investigator places the accused or the suspect in a corresponding medical institution, which shall be indicated in the order to conduct the examination.
...
The time spent in the psychiatric medical institution shall be counted towards the term of detention...”
Under Section 40 § 2 of the Law on Psychiatric Aid of 2 July 1992 provides that a patient may be discharged from a psychiatric hospital upon completion of the examination he was placed in the hospital for.
Article 235 governs the procedure for examination of an application to exclude certain evidence.
Article 271 provides general rules for lodging and examination of applications.