The application concerns the arrest of the applicant on suspicion of a series of sexual assaults and attempts to abduct minors, and his subsequent pre-trial detention, before his acquittal twenty-seven days later. The applicant mainly complained that there had been no reasonable suspicion that he had committed an offence, and claimed that he had been remanded in pre-trial detention following an irregular investigation, in breach of Article 5 of the Convention.
The applicant was born in 1972 and lives in Istanbul. He was represented before the Court by Mr M. Yavuz and Mr Z. D. Çiftçioğlu, lawyers practising in Istanbul. The Turkish Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent
The facts of the case, as submitted by the parties, may be summarised as follows.
In 2002 several children were the victims of sexual assaults perpetrated by the same person, a person who was acting mainly in Ümraniye (Istanbul). In addition, on 25 October 2002 and 6 November 2002 there were two attempts to abduct children in the district of Samandıra, also in Istanbul.
On 16 November 2002 the applicant was arrested in Samandıra. Following an anonymous call reporting the presence of an individual who resembled the photofit of the alleged perpetrator of the sexual assaults, gendarmes went to the area indicated by the caller and arrested the applicant, on the basis that he resembled the wanted person. According to the arrest and search report, signed by the applicant, he was arrested on suspicion of attempted child abduction and was notified of his rights. On the report, the question as to whether the applicant had a criminal record was answered in the affirmative. Another handwritten report consisting of a few lines, which was drawn up on the same day by three gendarmes, stated that the applicant had been arrested during a routine patrol for failing to produce his identity card.
On the same date the gendarmes organised an identification parade, during which child victims and a child witness identified the applicant as the perpetrator of the attempted abductions. The witness identified him with certainty, and both victims noted that the applicant strongly resembled the perpetrator of the attempted abductions.
DNA testing carried out while the applicant was in police custody showed that he was not responsible for the sexual assaults.
When questioned by gendarmes on 18 November 2002 about the attempted abduction of the two girls in question, the applicant, while acknowledging the resemblance between himself and the person depicted on the photofit, pointed out that the DNA test had shown that he was not responsible for the sexual assaults, and he denied being the perpetrator of the attempted abductions. The transcript of the questioning indicated that the applicant had no criminal record. After he was notified of his right to be assisted by a lawyer, he indicated that he did not wish to be assisted by a lawyer.
On 18 November 2002 the commander of the gendarmerie station sent the investigation file to the Kartal public prosecutor’s office, together with a letter explaining what investigative measures had been carried out. He stated that an identification parade had been carried out by presenting the applicant alongside two gendarmes in civilian clothes. Samples had been taken from the applicant and sent for expert examination. According to the results, the applicant was not the perpetrator of the sexual assaults and he had no criminal record. The commander of the gendarmerie station stated that he believed that the victims, the witness and their families had probably acted under the influence of press publications about the “Ümraniye pervert” and had identified the applicant because of his resemblance to the person depicted on the photofit.
On the same day the applicant was brought before the judge of the Kartal Criminal Court, who ordered his pre-trial detention in the light of the evidence gathered during the investigation and the nature and seriousness of the alleged offences.
On 20 November 2002 the applicant’s lawyer lodged an objection to the decision to remand the applicant in custody. He pointed out that the DNA tests had shown that his client was not responsible, and he also referred to contradictions in the descriptions of the attempted abductions which had been given by the victims. He argued that the identification parade had been irregular, as his client had been presented alongside two other persons with no distinguishing features, whereas his client’s face was partially burned. Moreover, the victims had not identified his client with certainty during the identification parade. The lawyer also referred to the doubts expressed by the commander of the gendarmerie station as to the identification of the applicant during the identification parade. He concluded by stating that the conditions required by Article 104 of the former Code of Criminal Procedure had not been met. He stated that his client had been arrested because of his resemblance to the person depicted on the photofit of the “Ümraniye pervert” and that he had been detained on the basis of contradictory statements and identifications. Lastly, the lawyer explained that at the time of the attempted abductions the applicant had been working in a neighbourhood far away from the premises in question.
On 21 November 2002 the Kartal Criminal Court rejected that objection.
On 22 November 2012 the applicant was charged with the attempted abduction of minors, and his trial began before the Assize Court of Kartal.
On 11 December 2002 the father of one of the victims submitted a petition to the Assize Court of Kartal. Although his daughter had identified the applicant as the perpetrator of her attempted abduction during the identification parade, he stated that she had acted under the influence of news items about the series of sexual assaults which had been widely distributed in the press and on television, and that after seeing the person who had been arrested for those offences on television (another person, not the applicant), their opinion about the applicant had changed. They were now convinced that the applicant was not the perpetrator of the attempted abduction.
On 13 December 2002 the Assize Court of Kartal held a hearing in which the applicant was confronted with the child victims. The victims unequivocally indicated that the applicant was not the perpetrator of the attempted abductions. On the basis of their statements, the Assize Court of Kartal considered that the applicant had not committed the acts of which he was accused (bu suçları işlemediği anlaşıldığından) and acquitted him.
Following the publication of an article about the applicant in a daily newspaper, the Kartal public prosecutor opened a criminal investigation ex proprio motu and took statements from him. The applicant explained that he had not been ill-treated either in police custody or in prison. His main complaint was that he had not been able to enjoy his rights while in police custody (yasal haklarımın kullandırılmaması); he had not been informed of the charges against him until his appearance before the prosecutor, he had not had access to a lawyer, and he had not been allowed to inform his family about what was happening. He also complained that he had been presented to the public as the perpetrator of a series of sexual assaults.
At the end of the investigation conducted by him, and in the light of all the information gathered, on 26 December 2002 the public prosecutor issued a decision not to prosecute with regard to the allegations of the applicant. He stated that he had found no irregularities in the matters complained of by the applicant or any ill-treatment. According to the gendarmes’ statements, the applicant had been arrested in connection with acts committed in Samandıra, during a check carried out because of his resemblance to the person described given by the victims. According to the officers, the applicant had not been able to produce his identity document, and had therefore been taken to the police station. Shortly after he had been taken to the police station his family had been informed of this by telephone and his brother had taken the identity card to the police station, which was confirmed by the police custody records. Lastly, the prosecutor noted that the applicant had been notified of his right to be assisted by a lawyer.
An objection lodged against the decision not to prosecute was rejected on 4 March 2003.
In the meantime, on 8 January 2003 the applicant had lodged a formal complaint. He claimed to have been subjected to degrading and humiliating treatment while in police custody, and complained of irregularities in respect of his arrest and detention. He alleged, inter alia, that the gendarmes had not been competent to arrest him, as the area where he had been arrested fell within the jurisdiction of the police. He also complained that the reports drawn up while he had been in police custody contained inaccurate information about the circumstances of his arrest and his criminal record. He also complained that he had not enjoyed his legal rights while in police custody (he had not been informed of the charges against him, and he had not had access to a lawyer). He also asserted that the identification parades had been irregular, as he had been presented alongside the fathers of the victims. Lastly, he complained that the gendarmes had exposed him to the public at the entrance to the courthouse.
The public prosecutor in Kartal took statements from the applicant, his brothers, the witnesses who had been present at the scene of the applicant’s arrest and the gendarmes. At the end of his investigation, on 17 October 2003 the public prosecutor issued an additional decision not to prosecute. He pointed out that an investigation had already been conducted into the same facts and allegations, and it had ended in a decision not to prosecute. In the light of the information gathered in the course of the additional investigation, the public prosecutor considered that there was no need to prosecute the gendarmes.
As to the handwritten report indicating that the applicant had been arrested by gendarmes during routine patrols for failing to produce his identity card, on 17 October 2003 the public prosecutor also decided to charge three gendarmes with abuse of authority (görevi kötüye kullanmak). He accused them of having wrongly indicated in the handwritten report that the applicant had been arrested by gendarmes during routine patrols for failing to produce his identity card.
On 18 March 2004 the Assize Court of Kadıköy dismissed an objection lodged by the applicant against the additional decision not to prosecute, on the grounds that there had been a failure to comply with the time-limit for an appeal against that decision. It noted that the objection had been lodged more than fifteen days after the applicant had been notified of the decision in question.
With regard to the criminal proceedings against the gendarmes for abuse of authority, on 23 June 2005 the Kartal Criminal Court acquitted the gendarmes in question. After cassation proceedings and a referral, on 30 June 2011 the Kartal Criminal Court decided to terminate the criminal action because it was time-barred.
Following his acquittal, on 6 March 2003 the applicant lodged a claim for compensation under Act No. 466 with the Assize Court of Kadıköy. He based his claim on the arguments which he had put forward in his criminal complaint of 8 January 2003 (see paragraph 18 above). He added that he had been arrested in the absence of evidence and unlawfully deprived of his liberty.
On 22 September 2003 the Assize Court of Kadıköy awarded the applicant 697 Turkish liras (TRY) for pecuniary damage and TRY 1,000 for non-pecuniary damage. It noted that the applicant had been acquitted and released after being in detention for twenty-seven days, and that he had been unjustly deprived of his liberty.
The applicant appealed to the Court of Cassation, alleging that the sums awarded by the Assize Court of Kadıköy were insufficient.
On 16 November 2006 the Court of Cassation rejected all the arguments put forward by the applicant, except one alleging that the sum awarded for his lawyer’s fees was too low, and it quashed the Assize Court of Kadıköy’s decision.
After the cassation proceedings had ended and the case was referred back to the Assize Court of Kadıköy, by a decision of 22 March 2007 that court awarded the same amounts for pecuniary and non-pecuniary damage, but increased the sum awarded for legal fees to TRY 1,000. The applicant and his lawyer had asked the court to comply with the judgment given in the cassation proceedings.
That decision by the Assize Court of Kadıköy, which only the Treasury appealed against, was confirmed by the Court of Cassation on 4 November 2011.
On 3 August 2012 the applicant was paid the sums awarded to him by the Assize Court of Kadıköy, together with interest at the legal rate running from 22 March 2007; he was paid TRY 4,443 in total. The sum paid in respect of non-pecuniary damage amounted to approximately TRY 1,650, including interest (the equivalent of EUR 745 at the exchange rate at the relevant time).
On 12 March 2004 the applicant lodged an application with the Istanbul Administrative Court, with a view to obtaining compensation for the harm which he had suffered because he had been unlawfully detained, his rights had not been respected in custody, he had been ill-treated, and his reputation had been damaged as a result of the confidentiality of the investigation not being respected and his name being disclosed so that he had been identified as the “Ümraniye pervert”.
On 24 July 2006 the Third Administrative Court of Istanbul rejected that application. The court noted that the claim was made up of two parts. In so far as it was based on the irregularities in the applicant’s arrest and detention, the court considered that the claim fell within the scope of Law No. 466, and noted that the applicant had been awarded compensation by the Assize Court of Kadıköy. With regard to the applicant’s complaint that his identity had been disclosed and he had been exposed to the press, the court considered those allegations unfounded. According to the court, the authorities had not provided any information from the investigation file or made any statements to the press. The court concluded that no misconduct could be attributed to the authorities.
On 11 October 2010 the Council of State quashed the part of the judgment dismissing the applicant’s claims in respect of non-pecuniary damage. It considered that the applicant had been exposed to public opinion during his time in police custody because the authorities had communicated information to the press and television channels, and thus had acted in contravention of the principle whereby an investigation was confidential. The way in which the gendarmes had conducted the investigation, in violation of this principle, amounted to misconduct, for which the authorities were responsible. The Council of State therefore considered that compensation should be awarded in this regard.
After several sets of cassation proceedings the applicant was finally awarded TRY 80,000 for the non-pecuniary damage he had suffered as a result of the violation of the principle of confidentiality.