The case originated in three applications (nos. 35553/12, 36678/12 and 36711/12) against the Kingdom of Denmark lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by three Danish nationals, Mr S., Mr V. and Mr A. (“the applicants”), on 8 June 2012. The President of the Grand Chamber acceded to the applicants’ request not to have their names disclosed (Rule 47 § 4 of the Rules of Court).
The applicants were represented by Mr C. Bonnez, a lawyer practising in Aarhus, and Mr T. Stadarfeld Jensen and Mrs H. Ziebe, advisers. The Danish Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Mr T. Elling Rehfeld, counsel, and Mrs N. Holst-Christensen, Mr C. Wegener and Mr J. van Deurs, advisers.
The applicants alleged in particular that their preventive detention had been in breach of Article 5 § 1 of the Convention.
On 7 January 2014 the applicants’ complaint under Article 5 was communicated to the Government, and their complaints under Articles 7 and 11 of the Convention were declared inadmissible, pursuant to Rule 54 § 3.
On 11 July 2017 a Chamber of the Second Section, composed of Robert Spano, President, Julia Laffranque, Ledi Bianku, Nebojša Vučinić, Paul Lemmens, Jon Fridrik Kjølbro, Stéphanie Mourou-Vikström, judges, and Stanley Naismith, Section Registrar, relinquished jurisdiction in favour of the Grand Chamber, neither of the parties having objected to such relinquishment (Article 30 of the Convention and Rule 72).
The composition of the Grand Chamber was determined according to the provisions of Article 26 §§ 4 and 5 of the Convention and Rule 24.
The applicants and the Government filed observations on the admissibility and merits of the applications.
A hearing took place in public in the Human Rights Building, Strasbourg, on 17 January 2018.
There appeared before the Court:
The Court heard addresses by Mr Elling Rehfeld and Mr Bonnez and the replies given by them to the questions put by the judges.
The first applicant, Mr S., was born in 1989. The second applicant, Mr V., and the third applicant, Mr A., were both born in 1982.
On Saturday 10 October 2009 from 8 to 10 p.m. a football match between Denmark and Sweden was held in Copenhagen. The stadium had a capacity of 38,000 spectators. Beforehand the police had received intelligence reports of intentions among various club factions from Denmark and Sweden to instigate hooligan brawls. Consequently, in addition to the Copenhagen Police, which was in operation as usual, an extra 186 police officers were called on duty. Most of them wore uniforms throughout the day. They were familiar with members of local football factions.
The three applicants went to Copenhagen to watch the match. They were detained during the day by virtue of section 5(3) of the Police Act (Politiloven) (see paragraph 29 below).
Altogether 138 spectators/hooligans were detained, approximately half of them under section 755 of the Administration of Justice Act (Retsplejeloven) (see paragraph 35 below), being charged with various criminal offences, while the other half were detained under section 5(3) of the Police Act outside the context of criminal proceedings.
The first applicant was detained from 4.45 p.m. to 12.06 a.m., a total of seven hours and twenty-one minutes.
The second applicant was detained from 3.50 p.m. to 11.27 p.m., a total of seven hours and thirty-seven minutes.
The third applicant was detained from 3.50 p.m. to 11.34 p.m., a total of seven hours and forty-four minutes.
The last disturbances in the city centre of Copenhagen resulting in detentions took place at 10.51 p.m. and 11.21 p.m., at which time it was recorded that a police transport wagon was holding thirty-five detainees (those detained at 10.51 p.m.).
On 15 October 2009, on behalf of the applicants, their representative requested that the police bring the cases before the courts in order to examine the lawfulness of the detention under chapter 43a of the Administration of Justice Act. She also sought compensation under section 469, subsection 6, of the same Act.
On 4 November 2009, the parties having agreed on a common venue, the cases were brought before the Aarhus City Court (Retten i Aarhus). The applicants, three witnesses on their behalf, the leader of the police operation and four other representatives of the police were heard. The case was tried over three days, on 11 March, 6 September and 28 October 2010.
The applicants explained that they had been part of a group of approximately twenty-five people from Aarhus, who had arrived in Copenhagen well before the match was due to begin. They had met between five and ten friends from Copenhagen and entered a pub. A group of forty or fifty people had afterwards left the pub to find a bigger pub on the Strøget pedestrian shopping street but the police had led them down a side street and detained the second and third applicants and four others. Subsequently, the first applicant had gone with some friends to another pub. Later on he had gone to a square opposite Tivoli Gardens to meet a friend from Aarhus. While standing outside with this friend, and talking on the phone with another friend from Copenhagen, he had been detained. The applicants argued that they had not been involved in any altercations; nor had they had any such intention. They confirmed that on a couple of previous occasions, they had been held in police custody in connection with other football matches.
A “Memorandum on detentions in connection with the international match between Denmark and Sweden on 10 October 2009”, prepared by Chief Inspector B.O., the strategic commander for the event, was submitted to the City Court. It stated that the police had received intelligence reports that hooligan groups from both countries were set on fighting each other on the match day. The risk of fighting was increased by the fact that the match would not start until 8 p.m., leaving considerable time for each group to consume alcoholic beverages beforehand. In order to prevent such clashes, the plan was to start engaging in proactive dialogue from 12 noon, when the first fans/spectators appeared, and in the event of clashes, first to arrest the instigators under section 755 of the Administration of Justice Act and charge them or, if that was not possible, to detain the instigators by virtue of section 5(3) of the Police Act. Since detention under the latter provision, as far as possible, should not exceed six hours, the memorandum specifically stated that it was preferable to avoid detaining anyone too early during the day, since they would then have to be released during or after the game, with the possibility that they would head for the city centre again and resume their involvement in brawls. At 3.41 p.m. the first big fight started between Danish and Swedish supporters at Amagertorv Square, on Strøget in the centre of Copenhagen, resulting in five or six individuals being detained, including the second and third applicants. Subsequently, elsewhere, other supporters were detained, including the first applicant. Up until the start of the match, further individuals who instigated and directed fights were detained, but the manoeuvre tactics continued to be a dialogue to ensure that the large number of supporters behaved and made their way to the stadium to watch the match. After the match, another large brawl started in the city centre, resulting in further detentions of a large group of Swedish and Danish supporters/hooligans.
Before the City Court, Chief Inspector B.O. stated, inter alia:
“... that he was the strategic commander for the event and located in the control room in connection with the international football match between Denmark and Sweden on 10 October 2009. The police had received intelligence reports of intentions among various club factions from Denmark and Sweden to initiate hooligan brawls in connection with the match. The police were therefore prepared for it not to be the usual audience of festive Danish and Swedish supporters. This information had come from police ‘spotters’ in different networks of football fans. They had received information that Danish and Swedish groups had planned to collaborate ... Police preparations had targeted different locations in Copenhagen. It was the intention to locate the various groups, talk to them to calm them down and accordingly dampen tempers before they reached the national stadium. The police had already deployed forces and divided them into groups at around 2 p.m. on the basis of intelligence that the spectators would arrive early to go partying. They had managed to locate the groups of fans by means of their spotters, and it had turned out that the fans were divided into a Swedish and a Danish group. They had seen the first large fight between Danish and Swedish hooligans at around 3.40 p.m. The fight had occurred in the central part of Strøget, the pedestrian shopping street, outside bar D, where the Swedish group had settled down. Prior to the fight, they had located the Danish groups in the central courtyard of Boltens Gård. According to the intelligence, the Danish people involved were supporters of the football clubs of Brøndby, Lyngby [Copenhagen] and AGF [Aarhus]. This intelligence had been collected by police officers in the home towns of these clubs. Those police officers had come to Copenhagen to assist, and they had recognised supporters.
The fight had taken the police somewhat by surprise, but they had managed to segregate the Swedish supporters at the bar D, and guide the Danish participants down Valkendorffsgade, a small side street off the pedestrian shopping street. It was a group of about fifty to sixty Danish fans altogether. He did not know the number of persons involved directly in the fight, but had understood from local reports that there were about fifty or sixty persons on either side. A fight of this kind causes a lot of uncertainty.
He himself had been in the control room, but had had regular contact with people at the scene of the incident. He was the one who had made the decision to detain persons who could not be charged with an offence, that is, detention pursuant to the Police Act. It had been planned that only the instigators should be detained. To the extent possible, they had also intended to avoid detaining many people early in the day because those people would then have to be released during or right after the match and would then be able to head for the city centre again and resume fighting. He had made use of local [police] spotters to identify six leading members, who had then been detained. They had been identified on the basis of police officers’ prior knowledge of them, combined with their ongoing observations. The crucial factor had naturally been the individuals’ actual behaviour. They would not have been detained if they had not been acting as instigators ...
The detainees had been released following an assessment of the situation in central Copenhagen. The police had started releasing the detainees after midnight, when the situation in central Copenhagen had calmed down and it had been assessed that there was no one with whom the newly released persons could start a fight. He was, of course, aware of the six-hour rule laid down in the Police Act, but it might be necessary to exceed this maximum period. They had done so deliberately that particular evening. Had there been no violence after the expiry of the six-hour period, there would have been no justification for not releasing the detainees. The purpose had definitely been to avoid confrontations and fights and situations causing uncertainty. They had made a continuous assessment during the period of detention.
Normally there were no problems in relation to the six-hour rule in connection with matches played earlier in the day/on weekdays when people did not arrive so early. The control room team had included an investigator who had had regular contact with the Bellahøj police station regarding the detentions. The detainees who had been charged with an offence had been released after the match. As regards the persons detained under the Police Act, a comprehensive, general assessment had been made and then those persons had been released one by one when the danger had passed. He had been involved in the general assessment of the length of the detention periods, but not in the assessment of the individual cases. The control room had been closed down shortly after midnight, when the observers around the city had reported that things were quiet and that people were on their way home/back to their hotels. As already mentioned, it had been decided to release detainees on the basis of a general assessment made in the control room, but the actual releases had been effected at the Bellahøj police station. The police’s assessment had been that the detainees would meet up again and start new fights if released before the streets of the city centre had become quiet ...”
Police Constable P.W. stated:
“... that he had participated as a member of a special patrol in the police action in Copenhagen on 10 October 2009 in connection with the international match. They had received intelligence that hooligans from Aarhus would meet with other hooligans from Denmark to fight Swedish football fans. The Copenhagen Police had asked for help from the police of other districts in Denmark who were familiar with members of local factions. He and his colleagues had met at around 11 a.m. for a briefing. He and a colleague of his from the Police of Eastern Jutland had then moved around the city to look for any hooligans from Aarhus whom they might recognise. They had been told that people from Brøndby had gathered at a particular bar, and they had gone there. Among the people they had seen were [the first and second applicants]. [The second applicant] had been sitting together with A, the leader of South Side United (SSU), which is a local faction from Brøndby. There had been a good atmosphere, and no violence. The witness had remained standing outside for a short while and had talked to people from Aarhus. It had probably been around 1 p.m. He and his colleague and some other officers had then posted themselves opposite the bar to keep an eye on what was going on. They had received reports that Swedes and Danes were to meet and fight. At some point the Danish hooligans had started leaving the bar, walking down the pedestrian shopping street towards Amagertorv Square [around 700 metres from the bar].
[The witness] had worked in the special patrol for four years and had met [the first and second applicants] several times at previous fights in connection with football matches. He had seen them take part in fights and heard them shout ‘White Pride Hooligan’. He and his colleagues had followed the group and reported back to the control room. When they had come closer to Amagertorv Square, police personnel carriers had been parked crosswise to prevent the group from colliding with the Swedish football fans. The Danish hooligans had then been turned around and taken down a side street, where they had been registered and searched.
They had been told by the control room to select two leading hooligans from Aarhus. He and his colleague had agreed on selecting [the second and third applicants]. It had happened in a calm manner. The reason why [the second applicant] had been taken to the police station was that they had indeed seen him talking to A, combined with their prior knowledge of him. [The third applicant] had also been taken to the police station because of their knowledge of him. [The witness] had written a report on the detentions a couple of hours later.
When questioned about Exhibit 46 at the bottom and its continuation on Exhibit 47 at the top [the police reports written by him], according to which both [the second and third applicants] had issued several orders to the other hooligans from Aarhus, the witness stated that he could no longer recall the details, but if this was what he had written, then that was how it had been. The purpose of detaining those two persons had been to create calm and prevent clashes. This had apparently succeeded because he had been present during the international match himself, and it had been obvious that the hooligans from Aarhus had been missing someone to take control. When the group from the bar was being guided into the side street, a couple of people might have tried to disappear into the crowd, but the group had followed directions from the police.
White Pride supporters were characterised by being highly structured. It was very clear that someone was in control. Directions were issued by the leaders, and the directions were obeyed. The three factions present at the bar had come from Aarhus, Brøndby and Lyngby and were not usually friends. They had come out together and walked in a group towards Amagertorv Square, where the Swedish hooligans were supposed to be.”
Police Constable M.W. stated:
“... that he had participated in the police action in Copenhagen on 10 October 2009 as a dog handler. He had been involved in the administrative detention of a person [the first applicant] at Axeltorv Square. He did not recall the name of this person, but it was the only person whom he had been involved in detaining. He and a colleague of his had been sitting observing in a car at Axeltorv Square, when a citizen, a man aged 40 to 45, holding his son of about five by the hand, had contacted them saying that three people, whom he had pointed out from a very short distance, were planning a fight as they had been calling various mates, telling them to meet up at the entrance to Tivoli Gardens and try to start a fight with some Swedish supporters. This citizen had overheard the calls just before he had contacted the police, and he had pointed out one of the three persons in particular. The person in question was still talking on his mobile phone at that time. The witness and his colleague considered the person making the report to be highly credible. The person making the report did not look like a typical football supporter.
The witness had continued to keep an eye on the person standing with his telephone to his ear. When the three men noticed that the witness and his colleague had caught sight of them, they had started to walk in different directions. The witness had then detained the person who had the telephone to his ear. Some colleagues driving in the police personnel carrier which had arrived in the meantime had detained the other two people ...”
Chief Inspector P.J. stated:
“... that he had been involved in placing detainees in cells, upholding the detentions and releasing the detainees. When the Copenhagen Police planned comprehensive police actions and expected to detain many people, he was usually selected as the person responsible for verifying that standard procedures were observed when the detainees were placed in a cell at Bellahøj police station.
On the relevant evening he had been assisted by two leaders, each of whom had assistance from two colleagues in carrying out body searches, and making photo recordings, of the detainees. Ten additional police officers were there to help. One of his tasks had been to make sure that the six-hour rule was observed. They had been faced with the issue that the six-hour period applicable to two of the persons detained under the Police Act expired at 9.50 p.m. He had contacted the control-room supervisor before the expiry of this period. Concurrently, clashes had been starting in the streets, and the control-room supervisor had decided not to let the relevant persons out. They had not wanted to add fuel to the fire. This decision had been made by the supervisors because he himself did not have the power to make such a decision. He had talked to the control room many times during that evening from 9.30 p.m. onwards. Very many detainees had been brought to the police station up until around 11 p.m., reaching a total of 136 detainees. Half of them had been detained under the Police Act. He had regularly asked when they should start releasing the detainees. He had not called and asked about specific names, but a general assessment had been made on an ongoing basis for all detainees from the time when the statutory six-hour periods started to expire. The radio communication had made it possible for him to keep updated about when things started calming down after the arrests of people in the Boltens Gård courtyard, and finally it had been confirmed that he could start releasing the persons detained under the Police Act. He did not keep a log of all telephone calls and was therefore unable to give the exact time. As far as he recalled, there had probably been one detainee under 18 years old who had been fetched by his parents before the end of the six-hour period, but otherwise no one else had been let out before the two initial detainees. It could very well have happened that some of his colleagues had started taking people out of the cells before the end of the six-hour period when they had received the information from the control room, because everybody was highly aware of the six-hour rule. If the persons concerned had subsequently been returned to their cells, the reason was an order from the control room saying that they should continue to be detained.”
By a judgment of 25 November 2010 the City Court found against the applicants for the following reasons:
“The Copenhagen Police ought to have brought the matters before the court within five days of receipt, as set out in section 469(2) of the Administration of Justice Act. The court finds, however, that the nonsubmission does not as such give rise to liability making the plaintiffs eligible for compensation.
Based on the evidence, the court accepts as fact that the Copenhagen Police had received intelligence prior to the international football match between Denmark and Sweden on 10 October 2009 that Danish and Swedish hooligan groups had arranged to meet in connection with the match and that the police had seen the first large fight between Danish and Swedish football fans at Amagertorv Square at 3.41 p.m. This implied a concrete and imminent risk of disturbance of public order, and the police were under a duty to attempt to prevent such disturbance; see section 5(1) of the Police Act.
According to the evidence given by Police Constable P.W., compared with the police report prepared by the same witness on 11 October 2009 (Exhibits 47 and 48), the court accepts as fact that [the second and third applicants] were detained after the witness had specifically seen the persons concerned talking with an activist from the local Brøndby faction of South Side United on 10 October 2009 and issuing orders to others, in combination with the fact that the persons concerned were known to the police for having been detained several times previously in connection with similar football events.
The court also accepts as fact, based on the evidence given by Police Constable M.W., compared with the evidence given by Chief Inspector B.O., that [the first applicant], who had also been detained several times previously in connection with similar events, was detained because a person, whom M.W. and his colleague had deemed to be highly credible, had spontaneously contacted him stating that he had just overheard a person, whom he had simultaneously pointed out as being [the first applicant], calling other people by phone and inciting them to start a fight with Swedish football fans at Tivoli Gardens together with him.
Less radical measures could not be deemed sufficient to avert the risk of additional unrest in those circumstances, and the court finds that the Copenhagen Police did not exceed their powers by detaining [the applicants] under section 5(3) of the Police Act on that basis.
Based on the evidence, the court accepts as fact that during the afternoon and evening, about 138 persons were detained, half of them being detained pursuant to the Police Act; that the unrest continued for the rest of the afternoon and all evening; and that the detention of the plaintiffs was ended as soon as the city centre had become quiet, in the assessment of the police, after a group comprising thirty-five Danes was arrested towards midnight. The court finds, in the circumstances of the present case, that there is no basis for invalidating the assessment made by the police, according to which the release of the detainees before the city centre had become quiet would have entailed a concrete and imminent risk of further unrest, including clashes with spectators who had been let out of the national stadium after the end of the match and who were still in the streets in large numbers.
It is stated in the second sentence of section 5(3) of the Police Act that detention must be as brief as possible and should not extend beyond six hours where possible. According to the preparatory notes on this provision, as described in the second column on page 32 of Bill no. 159 of 2 April 2004, the purpose of the detention must be taken into account in this assessment and any person so detained must be released when the circumstances giving rise to the detention no longer exist. It also appears from the preparatory notes on the same provision that normally the six-hour period can only be exceeded in connection with actions involving the detention of a considerable number of people, in which situations the time spent on transfer to the police station and registration and identification of detainees would render it impossible, in practice, to observe the six-hour rule.
Whilst the legislative intent of the provision is to extend detention to more than six hours only in exceptional situations, if an extension is not justified by practical issues related to the detention of a large number of people that render it impossible to observe the maximum period, the court finds on the above grounds, in view of the purpose of the detentions compared with the organised nature, scope and duration of the unrest, as well as the length of the specific periods by which the maximum periods had been exceeded, that the conditions for detaining [the applicants] pursuant to section 5(3) of the Police Act for more than six hours were met. Accordingly, there is no basis for awarding compensation to [the applicants].”
On appeal, for the reasons stated by the City Court, on 6 September 2011 the High Court of Western Denmark (Vestre Landsret) upheld the judgment.
On 12 December 2011, finding that the case raised no issue of principle, the Appeals Permission Board (Procesbevillingsnævnet) refused leave to appeal to the Supreme Court (Højesteret).
It appears that forty-nine persons (not including the applicants) were charged with criminal offences on the day of the match, notably for breaching the Executive Order on Police Measures to Maintain Public Order and Protect the Safety of Individuals and the Public, etc., and the Right of the Police to Launch Temporary Measures (bekendtgørelse om politiets sikring af den offentlige orden og beskyttelse af enkeltpersoners og den offentlige sikkerhed mv., samt politiets adgang til at iværksætte midlertidige foranstaltninger) (see paragraph 33 below). However, those charges were later withdrawn because it was deemed impossible to obtain sufficient evidence to prove that every single one of the persons charged had committed one or more criminal offences. One person was convicted under section 119 of the Penal Code for having thrown a glass item at a police officer’s head, and another person was convicted under section 121 for having verbally insulted a police officer on duty.
The relevant provisions of the Police Act (Act no. 444 of 9 September 2004) concerning order and security read as follows:
“1. It is the task of the police to prevent any risk of disturbance of public order and any danger to the safety of individuals and public security.
In so far as it is considered necessary to prevent danger as mentioned in subsection 1, the police may clear, close off, and establish access control to certain areas.”
“1. The police shall avert any risk of disturbance of public order and any danger to the safety of individuals and public security.
To avert a risk or danger referred to in subsection 1, the police may take measures against any person causing such danger. To this end, the police may
Where the less intrusive measures set out in subsection 2 are found to be inadequate to avert a risk or danger, the police may, if necessary, detain the person(s) causing the risk or danger. Such detention must be as short and moderate (skånsom) as possible and should not extend beyond six hours where possible.
The police may enter otherwise inaccessible areas without a court order, when it is necessary to avert danger as mentioned in subsection 1.”
A detention based on section 5(3) of the Police Act is outside the context of criminal proceedings (as opposed to an arrest under section 755 of the Administration of Justice Act, see paragraph 35 below). The purpose of a detention under section 5(3) is not to bring the person before a judge, neither to assess the lawfulness of a continued detention. The lawfulness may, however, subsequently be subject to judicial review. According to the preparatory notes on the Police Act, detention based on section 5(3) of the Police Act may not take place for the purpose of investigating or initiating criminal measures. The condition that the person must be causing a “risk or danger” implies that a concrete and imminent risk of disturbance of public order or of danger to the safety of individuals or public security must have been ascertained. What is crucial is the probability that the risk or danger will occur if the police do not intervene. The fact that a person is a well-known troublemaker does not as such justify such measures. Prior knowledge of a person or a group of persons may, however, be taken into account, together with the current circumstances. Whether the risk or danger is sufficient to justify a measure depends on an assessment made by the police of the individual situation. As to the wording “should not extend beyond six hours where possible”, the preparatory notes point out that the period should be reckoned from the time when the detention is effected. Any time spent on transfer to a police station must therefore be included in the calculation of the detention period. The sixhour period would normally only be exceeded in connection with actions involving the detention of a large number of persons, when the time spent on transfer to the police station and registration and identification of detainees would render it impossible, in practice, to observe the six-hour rule.
Section 469 of the Administration of Justice Act concerns the judicial review of detentions outside the criminal justice field. The request for judicial review is submitted to the authority which gave the decision on detention, whereupon the authority must bring the matter before the district court within five weekdays after the request was made.
Danish law contains a number of provisions which may be relevant in connection with hooligan brawls and disturbance of public order, and which can result in a sentence of a fine and/or imprisonment if violated. These provisions originate from both the Executive Order on Police Measures to Maintain Public Order and Protect the Safety of Individuals and the Public, etc., and the Right of the Police to Launch Temporary Measures (hereinafter “the Executive Order on Police Measures to Maintain Law and Public Order”) and the Danish Penal Code (Straffeloven).
The relevant sections of the Executive Order on Police Measures to Maintain Law and Order read as follows:
“1. No fighting, screaming, shouting or other loud, violent, insulting or similar behaviour likely to disturb public order shall be allowed.
...”
“(1) The penalty for breach of sections 3 ... is a fine. When determining a sentence, regard for the maintenance of public order and the protection of the safety of individuals and the public shall be accorded substantial weight. When determining a sentence for a breach of sections 3(1) ..., it shall additionally be considered an aggravating circumstance if the act was committed during or directly after a serious breach of the peace in a public place in the area. However, the third sentence hereof shall only apply if it was the intention of the person concerned that the peace in a public place should be seriously breached.
...”
The relevant articles of the Penal Code read as follows:
“Participants in affray or persons involved in any other serious breach of the peace in a public place shall be sentenced to imprisonment for a term not exceeding one year and six months if they have acted by mutual consent or several persons have acted together.”
“Any person who commits an act of violence against or otherwise assaults the person of another shall be sentenced to a fine or imprisonment for a term not exceeding three years.”
“(1) Any person who commits an assault on the person of another in a particularly offensive, brutal or dangerous manner, or is guilty of mistreatment, shall be sentenced to imprisonment for a term not exceeding six years. It shall be considered a particularly aggravating circumstance if such assault causes serious harm to the body or health of another person.
(2) Any person who harms the body or health of another person in cases other than those referred to in subsection (1) shall be sentenced to imprisonment for a term not exceeding six years.”
“(1) Any person who destroys, damages or removes any property belonging to another person shall be sentenced to a fine or imprisonment for a term not exceeding one year and six months.
(2) In the case of serious criminal damage or criminal damage carried out in a systematic or organised manner, or if the offender has previously been convicted under Article 291 ..., the sentence may be increased to imprisonment for six years.
(3) ...
(4) When determining a sentence under subsections (1) and (2), it shall be considered an aggravating circumstance if the act was committed during or directly after a serious breach of the peace in a public place in the area.”
An arrest within criminal proceedings is regulated by the following sections of the Administration of Justice Act:
“(1) The police may arrest any person who is reasonably suspected of a criminal offence subject to public prosecution, if arrest must be deemed necessary to prevent further criminal offences, to secure the person’s presence for the time being or to prevent his association with others.
...
(4) No arrest may be made if, in the nature of the case or the circumstances in general, deprivation of liberty would be a disproportionate measure.
...”
“(1) Any person who is taken into custody shall be released as soon as the reason for the arrest is no longer present. The time of his release shall appear in the report.
(2)  Where the person taken into custody has not been released at an earlier stage he shall be brought before a judge within twenty-four hours after his arrest. The time of the arrest and of his appearance in court shall appear in the court transcript.
...”
The Court observes that the draft Convention and Report prepared by the Consultative Assembly and the Working Papers of the Secretariat of the Council of Europe were submitted to the Committee of Experts, composed of government lawyers, legislators, judges and law professors from the twelve member States at the time. They met from 2 February to 10 March 1950. The Report by the Committee of Experts was submitted to the Conference of Senior Officials for the purpose of preparing the decision ultimately taken by the Committee of Ministers as to the final draft to be submitted to the Consultative Assembly.
The original basis for the text of Article 5 § 1 (c) (inspired by Article 9 of the draft International Covenant on Human Rights) read as follows (see Preparatory Work on Article 5 of the Convention, bilingual version, CDH (67) 10, p. 14):
“1. No one shall be deprived of his liberty save in the following cases and in accordance with a procedure prescribed by law:
...
(c) the arrest of a person effected for the purpose of bringing him before the competent legal authority on a reasonable suspicion of having committed an offence or which is reasonably considered to be necessary to prevent his committing a crime or fleeing after having done so; ...”
The text was amended as follows during the second session of the Committee of Experts (Article 7 § 1 of the “preliminary draft” of the Convention; ibid., pp. 22-23):
“(c) the lawful arrest and detention of a person effected for the purpose of bringing him before the competent legal authority on reasonable suspicion of having committed an offence or which is reasonably considered to be necessary to prevent his committing a crime, or fleeing after having done so; ...”
The text of Article 7 § 3 of the said draft (corresponding to the present Article 5 § 3) was amended as follows:
“Anyone arrested or detained on the charge of having committed a crime or to prevent his committing a crime shall be brought promptly before a judge or ...”
The “first draft” of the Convention of the Conference of Senior Officials (ibid., p. 29) reproduced the text of the above provisions as amended, renumbering them as Article 5 § 2 (c) and Article 5 § 4 respectively (ibid., p. 30).
In the “second draft” of the Convention (ibid., pp. 30-31), Article 5 § 2 was merged into Article 5 § 1 and paragraph 4 became paragraph 3, with the following change:
“3. Anyone arrested or detained on the charge of having committed a crime [deleted: or to prevent his committing a crime] in accordance with the provisions of para. 1 (c) shall be brought promptly before a judge or ...”
Subsequently, the Report of the Conference of Senior Officials on Human Rights to the Committee of Ministers on Article 5 §§ 1 (c) and 3 of the second draft (ibid., p. 32) stated:
“The Conference considered it useful to point out that where authorised arrest or detention is effected on reasonable suspicion of preventing the commission of a crime, it should not lead to the introduction of a régime of a Police State. It may, however, be necessary in certain circumstances to arrest an individual in order to prevent his committing a crime, even if the facts which show his intention to commit the crime do not of themselves constitute a penal offence. In order to avoid any possible abuses of the right thus conferred on public authorities, Article 13, para. 2 [the provision which foreshadowed Article 18], will have to be applied strictly.”
The following comments on these provisions were made by the United Kingdom delegation (ibid., p. 33):
“... The phrase ‘reasonable suspicion of preventing the commission of a crime’ is meaningless. The wording of Article 5 (1) (c) of the Convention should be followed, i.e. ‘on grounds which are reasonably considered to be necessary to prevent’.”
After the Fifth Session of the Committee of Ministers from 3 to 9 August 1950, the text of Article 5 § 3 was changed as follows (ibid., p. 35):
“3. Everyone arrested or detained [deleted: on the charge of having committed a crime] in accordance with the provisions of para. 1 (c) of this Article shall be brought promptly before a judge or ...”
On 3 November 1950, the day before the signature of the Convention (ibid., p. 36-37), the Committee of Experts took the opportunity to make slight amendments in the English version and changed “or which is reasonably considered to be necessary” to “or when it is reasonably considered necessary”. Since there is no explanation given for this change, it appears motivated solely by linguistic reasons. There is no indication of an intention to change substantively the content of the provision in question or to limit its scope.
Building upon the content of the European Convention on Spectator Violence and Misbehaviour at Sports Events and in particular at Football Matches of August 1985 (ETS No. 120), drawn up in the wake of the Heysel tragedy of 1985, the Council of Europe drafted the Convention on Integrated Safety, Security and Service Approach at Football Matches and Other Sports Events, which was opened for signature on 3 July 2016 and entered into force on 1 November 2017 (CETS No. 218). In so far as relevant, the provisions of this Convention read as follows:
“The aim of this Convention is to provide a safe, secure and welcoming environment at football matches and other sports events. To that end, the Parties shall:
“For the purposes of this Convention, the terms:
...
...”
“1.  The Parties shall ensure that national legal, regulatory or administrative frameworks require event organisers, in consultation with all partner agencies, to provide a safe and secure environment for all participants and spectators.
...”
“1.  The Parties shall encourage all agencies and stakeholders involved in organising football matches and other sports events in public spaces, including the municipal authorities, police, local communities and businesses, supporter representatives, football clubs and national associations, to work together, notably in respect of:
The Parties shall ensure that risk assessment and safety and security measures take account of the journey to and from the stadium.”
“1.  The Parties shall ensure that policing strategies are developed, regularly evaluated and refined in the light of national and international experience and good practices, and are consistent with the wider, integrated approach to safety, security and service.
The Parties shall ensure that policing strategies take account of good practices including, in particular: intelligence gathering, continuous risk assessment, risk-based deployment, proportionate intervention to prevent the escalation of risk or disorder, effective dialogue with supporters and the wider community, and evidence gathering of criminal activity as well as the sharing of such evidence with the competent authorities responsible for prosecution.
The Parties shall ensure that the police work in partnership with organisers, supporters, local communities and other stakeholders in making football matches and other sports events safe, secure and welcoming for all concerned.”
“1.  The Parties shall take all possible measures to reduce the risk of individuals or groups participating in, or organising incidents of violence or disorder.
...”
For the purposes of its examination of the present case, the Court deems it useful to refer to the judgment of 15 February 2017 of the Supreme Court of the United Kingdom in R v The Commissioner of Police for the Metropolis, in which the Court’s case-law on Article 5 § 1 (b) was found to be inconclusive. The four applicants in that case had been detained for up to five and a half hours to prevent an imminent breach of the peace during the wedding of the Duke and Duchess of Cambridge on 29 April 2011. The police had argued that the detention was justified under both Article 5 § 1 (b) and Article 5 § 1 (c).
The Administrative Court found that the detention had complied with Article 5 § 1 (c).
The Court of Appeal agreed, but for other reasons. It concluded that the purpose of the applicants’ detention had been to bring them before the competent legal authority if that were to become necessary, so as to prolong their detention on a lawful basis. It declined to follow the majority view in Ostendorf v. Germany (no. 15598/08, 7 March 2013) that Article 5 § 1 (c) was incapable of authorising purely preventive detention, notwithstanding the existence of good grounds to believe an offence to be imminent, and that the person concerned must be suspected of having already committed a criminal offence.
Finally, the Supreme Court, having analysed the Court’s case-law, and notably the divergent views expressed in the concurring opinion in Ostendorf (cited above), concluded that the detention was lawful under Article 5 § 1 (c). Lord Toulson (with whom Lord Mance, Lord Dyson, Lord Reed and Lord Carnwath agreed) stated, in particular:
“31. In this case there was nothing arbitrary about the decisions to arrest, detain and release the appellants. They were taken in good faith and were proportionate to the situation. If the police cannot lawfully arrest and detain a person for a relatively short time (too short for it to be practical to take the person before a court) in circumstances where this is reasonably considered to be necessary for the purpose of preventing imminent violence, the practical consequence would be to hamper severely their ability to carry out the difficult task of maintaining public order and safety at mass public events. This would run counter to the fundamental principles previously identified.
There is, however, a difficult question of law as to how such preventive power can be accommodated within article 5. The Strasbourg case law on the point is not clear and settled, as is evident from the division of opinions within the Fifth Section in Ostendorf. Moreover, while this court must take into account the Strasbourg case law, in the final analysis it has a judicial choice to make.
The view of the minority in Ostendorf, that article 5.1(c) is capable of applying in a case of detention for preventive purposes followed by early release (that is, before the person could practicably be brought before a court), is in my opinion correct for a number of reasons.
In the first place I agree with the Administrative Court that the situation fits more naturally within the language of article 5.1(c) than 5.1(b). On its plain wording article 5.1(c) covers three types of case, the second being when the arrest or detention of a person ‘is reasonably considered necessary to prevent his committing an offence.’
There is force in the argument that the interpretation adopted by the majority in Ostendorf collapses the second into the first (‘reasonable suspicion of having committed an offence’) and is inconsistent with Lawless [Lawless v. Ireland (no. 3), 1 July 1961, Series A no. 3].
It is accepted by the police that English courts should treat Lawless as authoritative, but in that case the court was not concerned with a situation in which the police had every reason to anticipate that the risk necessitating the person’s arrest would pass in a relatively short time and there was every likelihood of it ending before the person could as a matter of practicality be brought before a court. It would be perverse if it were the law that in such circumstances, in order to be lawfully able to detain the person so as to prevent their imminently committing an offence, the police must harbour a purpose of continuing the detention, after the risk had passed, until such time as the person could be brought before a court with a view to being bound over to keep the peace in future. This would lengthen the period of detention and place an unnecessary burden on court time and police resources.
Some analogy may be drawn with Brogan, in which the court rejected the argument that at the time of the arrest the police must intend to take the arrested person before the court willy nilly, regardless of whether on investigation there was cause to do so.
In order to make coherent sense and achieve the fundamental purpose of article 5, I would read the qualification on the power of arrest or detention under article 5.1(c), contained in the words ‘for the purpose of bringing him before the competent legal authority’, as implicitly dependent on the cause for detention continuing long enough for the person to be brought before the court. I agree therefore with Judges Lemmens and Jäderblom in para 5 of their judgment in Ostendorf (cited at para 25 above) that in the case of an early release from detention for preventive purposes, it is enough for guaranteeing the rights inherent in article 5 if the lawfulness of the detention can subsequently be challenged and decided by a court.
I prefer to put the matter that way, rather than as the Court of Appeal did by inferring the existence of a conditional purpose ab initio to take the appellants before the court, although it makes no difference to the result. I have no disagreement with the Court of Appeal that the appellants would have been brought before a court to determine the legality of their continued detention, if it had been considered necessary to detain them long enough for this to happen. The case would then have been materially similar to Nicol and Selvanayagam, where the applicants’ initial detention was preventive and they were later kept in custody and brought before the court to be bound over. It would be contrary to the spirit and underlying objective of article 5 if the appellants’ early release placed them in a stronger position to complain of a breach of article 5 than if it had been decided to detain them for longer in order to take them before magistrates to be bound over.
As to article 5.1(b), I am inclined to the same view as the minority in Ostendorf that the obligation has to be much more specific than a general obligation not to commit a criminal offence (or, in this case, a breach of the peace), and that such a general obligation does not acquire the necessary degree of specificity by focusing narrowly on the particular facts or by the person concerned being given a reminder of it in specific circumstances. There are also practical considerations. The police may find it necessary to take action to prevent an imminent breach of the peace in circumstances where there is not sufficient time to give a warning. An example might be a football match where two unruly groups collide and the police see no alternative but to detain them, or the ringleaders on both sides, immediately for what may be quite a short time. In summary, I would be concerned that in stretching article 5.1(b) beyond its previously recognised ambit the majority found it necessary to impose limitations which in another case might leave the police effectively powerless to step in for the protection of the public.”