The case originated in an application (no. 73455/11) against the  lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by two Tajikistani nationals, Mr Farrukh Fazlidinovich Sidikov and Mrs Umedakhon Ganiyevna Sidikova (“the applicants”), on 29 November 2011 and 25 January 2012 respectively.
The applicants were represented by Ms Y.Z. Ryabinina and Ms N. Yermolayeva, lawyers practising in . The Russian Government (“the Government”) were represented by Mr G. Matyushkin, Representative of the  at the European Court of Human Rights.
On 6 December 2011 the President of the First Section, acting upon the first applicant’s request of 5 December 2011, decided to apply Rules 39 and 41 of the Rules of Court, indicating to the Government that the first applicant should not be extradited to Tajikistan until further notice and granting priority treatment to the application.
On 22 March 2012 the application was communicated to the Government. It was also decided to rule on the admissibility and merits of the application at the same time (Article 29 § 1).
The applicants were born in 1972 and 1976 respectively and live in .
The applicants are married and have three minor children. They are practising Muslims.
According to the applicants, in 2003 the first applicant started expressing an interest in the ideology of Hizb ut-Tahrir, a transnational Islamic organisation which is banned in Russia,  and some Central Asian republics. In 2004 the first applicant became a member of that organisation. According to the second applicant, she was influenced by Hizb ut-Tahrir’s ideas until 2006 and then “voluntarily rejected” them.
In 2003 the Tajikistani authorities arrested the first applicant after finding leaflets published by Hizb ut-Tahrir in an outhouse belonging to him. According to the first applicant, the leaflets were planted there. During his detention, the authorities allegedly beat him in an attempt to extract a confession from him concerning his involvement in Hizb ut-Tahrir’s activities. According to the first applicant, his left heel bone was broken as a result of those beatings.
Upon his release from detention, the first applicant went into hiding in Tajikistan and then, in 2005, he arrived and settled in . The second applicant arrived in  with the children in 2006 and joined the first applicant.
On 4 January 2005 the Ministry of Security of the Republic of Tajikistan charged the first applicant with involvement in a criminal organisation (Article 187 § 2 of the Tajikistani Criminal Code), inciting racial, ethnic or religious hatred or hostility (Article 189 § 3 of the Tajikistani Criminal Code) and publicly calling for the overthrow of the political order or breach of the territorial integrity of the Republic of Tajikistan (Article 307 § 2 of the Tajikistani Criminal Code). The relevant decision stated, in particular, that the first applicant, being an active member of Hizb ut-Tahrir, had on numerous occasions disseminated extremist leaflets and literature for that organisation.
On the same date the Ministry of Security of the  ordered the first applicant’s arrest and put his name on a wanted list.
On 21 February 2006 the prosecutor’s office for the Sogdiyskiy Region of  (“the Sogdiyskiy prosecutor’s office”) instituted criminal proceedings against the second applicant on suspicion of her membership and active involvement in the activities of Hizb ut-Tahrir.
On the same date she was charged under Article 307-3 § 8 of the Tajikistani Criminal Code with involvement in a banned extremist organisation, and her name was put on a wanted list.
On 23 February 2006 the Sogdiyskiy prosecutor’s office ordered the second applicant’s arrest.
On 18 April 2006 the second applicant was again placed on a wanted list.
On 21 April 2009 the first applicant applied to the Federal Migration Service for Russian nationality, having presented himself as Timur Muratovich Abdullayev, a national of Kyrgyzstan, and having submitted a passport and a birth certificate in the name of the latter. On 20 July 2009 his application was granted.
As later it became known to the migration authorities that the first applicant had used forged documents, they applied to the courts seeking to have this fact legally established.
On 5 April 2011 the Samarskiy District Court of Samara granted the application. The court noted, in particular, that when questioned as a witness in a criminal case, the first applicant had submitted that his name was Farrukh Fazlidinovich Sidikov. In 2007, having paid a certain sum of money, he had obtained, through an acquaintance of his, the passport and birth certificate of a Kyrgyz national, Mr Abdullayev. He had used those documents to apply for Russian nationality, which he had eventually acquired under the identity of Mr Abdullayev. The court further noted that the first applicant had informed the court in writing that he had no objections to the case being examined in his absence. He had also conceded that he had submitted forged documents with his application for Russian nationality, explaining that he had left his country using a false name as he was afraid of persecution for religious reasons. The court went on to find that the documents submitted by the first applicant had never been issued by the Kyrgyzstani authorities. The court thus established that when applying for Russian nationality the first applicant had provided false information and submitted forged documents.
On 11 May 2011 the Federal Migration Service, having regard to the above court findings, declared the decision to grant Russian nationality to Mr Timur Muratovich Abdullayev void ab initio.
On 7 December 2010, in the course of an investigation carried out in Russia into the activities of Hizb ut-Tahrir members in , officers of the Moscow Department of the Federal Security Service (“the Moscow Department of the FSB”) searched the flat where the applicants were living.
On the same date the applicants were taken to the premises of the Moscow Department of the FSB and interviewed as witnesses in the aforementioned case. The first applicant stated, in particular, that he had taken an oath as a member of Hizb ut-Tahrir in 2004 in  and that he had reproduced and disseminated literature published by that organisation.
Later that day the first applicant was taken to the Meshchanskiy District Office of the Interior, where his arrest was ordered by virtue of the relevant provisions of the Russian Code of Criminal Procedure, as it was established that his name was on a wanted list in connection with various criminal charges brought against him in .
On 9 December 2010 the Meshchanskiy District Court of Moscow, having regard to a request made by the Meshchanskiy Inter-District Prosecutor’s Office and to the criminal proceedings instituted against the first applicant in Tajikistan and his placement on the wanted list, and with reference to Article 61 of the 1993 Minsk Convention and Article 108 of the Russian Code of Criminal Procedure (see paragraphs 94 and 116 below), authorised his detention until 16 January 2011 pending an extradition check in his respect. The first applicant did not appeal against that decision.
By a decision of 11 January 2011 the Meshchanskiy District Court of Moscow extended the first applicant’s detention until 7 June 2011. It stated that there were no grounds to alter the preventive measure, as the extradition check in respect of the first applicant had not been completed, and therefore without extending the first applicant’s detention it would not be possible to ensure his extradition to the . The court also noted that the first applicant was charged with serious criminal offences in Tajikistan which were also punishable under Russian criminal law, that he had no permanent or temporary place of residence or registration in Russia, that he had never been granted the status of refugee or forced migrant in Russia, and that there were sufficient reasons to believe that he might abscond if at liberty.
On 9 February 2011 the Moscow City Court dismissed the first applicant’s appeal and upheld the first-instance decision.
On 3 June 2011 the Meshchanskiy District Court of Moscow further extended the first applicant’s detention until 7 December 2011, stating that the extradition check in his respect had not yet been completed, that the grounds for the preventive measure remained unchanged and that, if released, he might try to abscond. This decision was upheld on appeal by the Moscow City Court on 6 July 2011. The first applicant’s lawyer was present at the hearing.
On 7 December 2011 the Meshchanskiy Inter-District Prosecutor’s Office ordered the first applicant’s release. The order stated that the first applicant had remained in detention for twelve months and that Article 109 of the Russian Code of Criminal Procedure provided that no extension of detention in excess of that period was permissible in respect of persons detained on suspicion of having committed offences such as those which the first applicant was charged with. The first applicant was released on the same day under a written undertaking not to leave his place of residence in  and to appear at the Meshchanskiy Inter-District Prosecutor’s Office every week.
On 9 December 2010 the Ministry of the Interior of Tajikistan asked the Meshchanskiy District Office of the Interior to remand the first applicant in custody while the extradition request in his respect was pending with the Tajikistani Prosecutor General’s Office.
On 29 December 2010 the Tajikistani Prosecutor General’s Office asked the Russian Prosecutor General’s Office to extradite the first applicant with a view to bringing him to justice in Tajikistan in connection with charges under Articles 187 § 2 (involvement in a criminal organisation), 189 § 3 (inciting racial, ethnic or religious hatred or hostility) and 307 § 2 (publicly calling for the overthrow of the political order or breach of the territorial integrity of the Republic of Tajikistan) of the Tajikistani Criminal Code.
The extradition request stated, in particular:
“We guarantee that in accordance with the norms of international law [the first applicant] will be provided in the Republic of Tajikistan with all means of defence, including the assistance of counsel, he will not be subjected to torture, cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment ([see] the European Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms, as well as the relevant Conventions of the United National and the Council of Europe and the Protocols thereto).
The offences [the first applicant] is charged with are not subject to capital punishment under the Criminal Code of the .
The Prosecutor General of the  guarantees that the extradition request [in respect of the first applicant] does not pursue the goals of his persecution [on the grounds of] race, religion, ethnic origin or political views.
On the basis of Article 66 [of the CIS Convention on legal aid and legal relations in civil, family and criminal cases], [we] undertake to prosecute [the first applicant] only for the offences in respect of which he is extradited to the . [The first applicant] will not be extradited to another State without the consent of the Russian [Federation] and after the criminal proceedings and serving of his sentence he will be free to leave the territory of the .”
On 2 February 2011 the first applicant’s lawyer asked the Russian Prosecutor General’s Office to refuse the Tajikistani authorities’ request for his extradition, stating that he ran a serious risk of being subjected to torture if extradited.
In a letter of 3 March 2011 the Russian Prosecutor General’s Office replied to the first applicant’s lawyer stating that the Tajikistani authorities had provided assurances that the first applicant would not be persecuted on political, racial, ethnic or religious grounds, that he would not be subjected to torture or inhuman or degrading treatment, that he would only be prosecuted for the offences of which he was accused and that he would be able to leave Tajikistan after he had served his sentence. The letter also stated that the first applicant’s arguments would be taken into account when the Russian Prosecutor General’s Office examined the extradition request in respect of the first applicant.
On 20 May 2011 the Prosecutor’s Office for the Samara Region informed the Russian Prosecutor General’s Office that by a decision of 5 April 2011 the Samarskiy District Court of Samara had established that when applying for Russian nationality the first applicant had provided false information and submitted forged documents in the name of Timur Abdullayev, a national of Kyrgyzstan, which had eventually served as a basis for granting him Russian nationality. Accordingly, the decision of the Federal Migration Service to grant him Russian nationality was void ab initio and his passport issued on 29 December 2009 was invalid and subject to seizure. The institution of criminal proceedings against the first applicant in this regard was refused on account of the expiry of the statutory limitation period.
On 23 May 2011 the Russian Federal Migration Service also informed the Russian Prosecutor General’s Office that by a decision of 5 April 2011 the Samarskiy District Court of Samara had established that the first applicant had provided false information and submitted forged documents so as to acquire Russian nationality. Accordingly, the decision of 20 July 2009 to grant him Russian nationality had been annulled on 11 May 2011.
On 31 May 2011 the administration of remand prison IZ-77/4 of , where the first applicant was being held, informed the Moscow Prosecutor’s Office that the first applicant had not lodged any requests to be granted refugee status through it.
On 15 June 2011 the Moscow Department of the Federal Migration Service informed the Meshchanskiy Inter-District Prosecutor’s Office that the first applicant had neither registered his residence in  nor applied for Russian nationality.
On an unspecified date after 14 June 2011 the Moscow Region Department of the Federal Migration Service also informed the Meshchanskiy Inter-District Prosecutor’s Office that the first applicant had never registered his residence in the Moscow Region, nor had he ever acquired Russian nationality.
On 30 June 2011 the Russian Prosecutor General’s Office granted the Tajikistani Prosecutor General’s Office’s request in part and ordered the first applicant’s extradition in so far as he was charged with involvement in a criminal group or organisation under Article 187 § 2 of the Tajikistani Criminal Code. The extradition order stated that all the other offences imputed to the first applicant in Tajikistan were not criminal offences in , and therefore that part of the extradition request could not be granted. The order also stated that the first applicant was a national of the , did not have Russian citizenship, and that there were no obstacles to his extradition.
The first applicant and his lawyer appealed against the extradition order. They pointed out that there was a serious risk that the first applicant would be ill-treated if extradited, as he had already been tortured when in detention in 2003 and because of his being charged with involvement in a proscribed religious organisation. In this connection they referred to, inter alia, the Court’s judgments in the cases of Gaforov v. Russia, no. 25404/09, §§ 130-34, 21 October 2010, and Khodzhayev v. , no. 52466/08, § 100, 12 May 2010, which cases concerned the possible extradition from Russia to Tajikistan of the applicants due to their presumed involvment in Hizb ut-Tahrir, and where the Court had found that extradition would be in breach of Article 3. The first applicant and his lawyer also referred to a number of reports of international organisations which outlined a number of areas of concern regarding the use of torture in .
In a decision of 14 September 2011 the Moscow City Court upheld the extradition order. The court observed that since 4 January 2005 criminal proceedings had been pending against the first applicant in  on a number of charges, that his detention had been ordered and that his name had been put on a wanted list as his whereabouts were unknown to the Tajikistani authorities. It also noted that the first applicant had been detained in Moscow on 7 December 2010 as a person wanted by the Tajikistani authorities. The court also observed that the first applicant was a Tajikistani national and did not have Russian citizenship or refugee status in .
The court went on to note that, according to the extradition order of 30 June 2011, the first applicant was to be extradited to the Republic of Tajikistan in connection with his involvement in a criminal organisation founded with the aim of committing serious and particularly serious criminal offences, which corresponded to an offence punishable under Article 210 of the Russian Criminal Code. It referred to the first applicant’s statements made during his interview as a witness on 7 December 2010. In particular, it noted that “[the first applicant] did not deny his membership in [Hizb ut-Tahrir] and had confirmed his loyalty to its aims by taking an oath and regularly paying membership fees”. The court stated that such actions were proscribed under Tajikistani criminal law and were punishable by fifteen to twenty years’ imprisonment. The court also held that the first applicant had been aware that he had been engaged in a proscribed activity and that, if found out, he would be subjected to criminal prosecution, and therefore considered that he had left Tajikistan in order to avoid prosecution. In the light of the foregoing, the court concluded that the first applicant “had evaded criminal liability for a criminal offence which he had committed in the territory of the ”, and that “he was not a refugee persecuted on political or religious grounds”.
The court went on to hold that the first applicant had not applied for refugee status in Russia, nor had he tried to obtain Russian citizenship with reference to persecution in the  or the risk of torture for his views. Instead, he had acquired Russian citizenship on the basis of false information and documents, using a false identity. The decision to grant Russian citizenship to the first applicant had been annulled some time later on those grounds. In addition, from the first applicant’s statements made during his interview on 7 December 2010, it was clear that he had been convicted of rape in Tajikistan, and that upon his release in 2004 after he had served a sentence of imprisonment, the Tajikistani law-enforcement authorities had stated that he was a person of interest and that they were seeking to verify whether he had been involved in any other criminal offences. The court also noted that the first applicant’s allegations of illtreatment in Tajikistan had not been corroborated by any evidence. In the court’s opinion, the foregoing could not serve as a basis for finding that the first applicant belonged to a group of people who were being persecuted on the grounds of their political and religious convictions and who ran a risk of being subjected to inhuman treatment.
The court further pointed out that the Tajikistani authorities had provided the necessary assurances, in accordance with international law, which had been taken into account by the Russian Prosecutor General’s Office when it had taken a decision on the first applicant’s extradition. The court added that it had no reason to call these assurances into doubt.
The court also stated that the first applicant’s argument to the effect that he had not committed the criminal offences imputed to him in Tajikistan could not be taken into account, as, under the relevant provisions of Russian criminal procedural law, during a review of the legality and validity of a decision of the Russian Prosecutor General’s Office to extradite a person to a foreign State, the courts were not empowered to review the issue of whether that person had committed the offences for which extradition was sought.
The court therefore held that, in the absence of any grounds to believe that the first applicant ran a risk of being subjected to torture or inhuman or degrading treatment and in view of the assurances provided by the Tajikistani authorities, the extradition order of 30 June 2011 was lawful and valid, and that the appeals of the first applicant and his lawyer against that order should be dismissed.
The first applicant and his lawyer appealed against the decision of 14 September 2011. They insisted that the first applicant ran a risk of being tortured if extradited, given that he was suspected of involvement in the activities of Hizb ut-Tahrir. The first applicant’s lawyer also contended that the wording of the aforementioned decision had violated his right to be presumed innocent, as the court had noted, with reference to the first applicant’s statements made during his interview as a witness on 7 December 2010 and at the hearing, that he had not denied his membership in Hizb ut-Tahrir.
On 6 December 2011 the Supreme Court of Russia (“the Supreme Court”) upheld the decision of 14 September 2011 on appeal. In so far as the Moscow City Court’s decision had upheld the decision to extradite the first applicant, the Supreme Court stated that it was well-reasoned and correctly decided. As regards the argument concerning the breach by the Moscow City Court of the presumption of innocence in respect of the first applicant, the Supreme Court stated as follows:
“There is no evidence that the [first-instance] court considered the issue of [the first applicant’s] guilt. On the contrary, in its decision the court pointed out that [the first applicant’s] argument that he had not committed the offence imputed [to him] could not be taken into account, as in accordance with [the relevant provisions of Russian criminal procedural law], during a review of the legality and validity of a decision of the Russian Prosecutor General’s Office to extradite a person to a foreign State, the courts are not [empowered to review the issue of whether] that person is guilty [of the offence in question] ...
The fact that the [first-instance] court reflected in its decision [the first applicant’s] explanations given at the hearing as regards his extradition in connection with his membership in Hizb ut-Tahrir cannot be regarded as consideration of the issue of his guilt.”
According to the second applicant, on 18 May 2011 investigator G. from the Moscow Department of the FSB telephoned her and informed her that she would have to appear for questioning as a witness the next day. The second applicant replied that she would appear with her lawyer upon receipt of a summons.
On 19 May 2011 at 9 a.m. officers from the Moscow Department of the FSB met the second applicant at the entrance door to the block of flats where she lived. According to her, the officers did not introduce themselves and she was only able to guess that they were FSB officers because they showed her a summons to appear before investigator G. for an interview. A copy of the summons submitted to the Court bears a hand-written note stating that the second applicant “refused to sign the summons without having given any explanations as to the reasons or motives” for that refusal.
According to the second applicant, the officers then forced her into a car and took her to the premises of the Moscow Department of the FSB, where she was held from 9.30 a.m. until 7.30 p.m. In her submission, no official record of her arrest was drawn up, no investigative actions were taken in respect of her and she was not allowed to contact her lawyer.
According to a transcript of a witness interview dated 19 May 2011, the second applicant was questioned as a witness on that date from 10.40 a.m. until 2.35 p.m. The transcript bears a hand-written note to the effect that the second applicant refused to sign it.
Later on 19 May 2011 the second applicant was taken to a police station operated by the Meshchanskiy District Office of the Interior, where an officer from that station drew up, in the presence of the second applicant’s lawyer, a record stating that the second applicant had been arrested at that police station at 7.30 p.m. on that date in accordance with the relevant provisions of the Russian Code of Criminal Procedure as a person wanted by the Tajikistani authorities on suspicion of her having committed an offence punishable under Article 307 of the Tajikistani Criminal Code. The second applicant wrote down on that record that she did not agree with her arrest, that she had in fact been detained since 9.00 a.m. when she had been apprehended by the FSB officers and that she had been refused the opportunity to contact her lawyer.
On 20 May 2011 the second applicant lodged a complaint with the Meshchanskiy Inter-District Prosecutor’s Office. She described the events of 19 May 2011 and requested that a review of the actions of the FSB officers taken in her respect be carried out.
By letter of 3 June 2011 the Meshchanskiy Inter-District Prosecutor’s Office replied to the second applicant, stating that her complaint had been examined and that an inquiry into the actions of the FSB officers complained of had not established any breaches of law or procedure, and there were therefore no grounds for the prosecutor’s office to take any measures in that connection. The letter also invited the second applicant to challenge the response before a higher prosecutor.
On 7 June 2011 the first applicant provided the applicants’ counsel with a written statement to the effect that during his questioning as a witness on 19 May 2011 State officials had shown him documents confirming the second applicant’s placement on a wanted list. They had allegedly told him that in the event of his refusal to sign certain statements his wife would be arrested.
On 10 June 2011 the second applicant’s lawyer lodged a court complaint against the FSB officers’ actions under Article 125 of the Russian Code of Criminal Procedure. She complained that between 9 a.m. and 7.30 p.m. on 19 May 2011 the second applicant had been held in unacknowledged detention and that her right to legal assistance had been breached during the questioning session.
On 20 June 2011 FSB officer Z. submitted a report to his superior concerning the events of 19 May 2011. The report was also submitted to the Meshchanskiy District Court of Moscow. According to the report, on 7 and 13 December 2010 the second applicant had been questioned as a witness in a criminal case against a number of Tajikistani nationals. On 18 May 2011 officer Z. received an order to establish the whereabouts of the second applicant as she was absent from her registered place of residence and, if found, to hand her the summons for questioning on 19 May 2011 in connection with the same criminal case. On the latter date at approximately 9 a.m. officer Z. together with officer L. arrived at the second applicant’s then current residence. They called her on the telephone, but as nobody answered they remained in the car waiting for her at the entrance to the block of flats. At approximately 9.12 a.m. the second applicant left the block of flats. The two officers then approached her, introduced themselves and presented their certificates attesting to their status as FSB officers. At the same time they explained that they were required to serve the summons for questioning on her and presented her with the summons. The second applicant refused to either take it or sign the document to that effect, stating that at a legal advice centre she had been advised not to sign any documents in the absence of her lawyer. Officer Z. then read out the summons, informing her that she had been summoned for questioning on 19 May 2011 at 9 a.m. and reminded the second applicant that she had previously been questioned in relation to this case and had the investigator’s telephone number. Therefore, she could call him and verify the summons. He also reminded her that it was her duty to appear for questioning and that she could otherwise be subjected to coercive measures. She replied that she was not trying to avoid questioning, but she was not going to make it in time for 9 a.m. Officer Z. then suggested that she call the investigator and arrange another time. She agreed to do that; however, she again refused to accept the summons, explaining that she would appear on a different date and answer all questions put to her. In the second applicant’s presence officer Z. then noted on the summons her refusal to accept it and the time of the refusal. After that he and officer L. got back into the car. However, the second applicant then approached them and said that she would not call the investigator to arrange another time if they could give her a lift to the questioning session. They agreed to do so. Officer Z. was driving, officer L. was in the front passenger seat while the second applicant was in the back seat by herself. Her freedom was not restricted in any way, and during the journey she was talking on a mobile phone and sending text messages. She did not show any anxiety concerning the questioning and did not make any requests, such as to contact her lawyer or her family. After they arrived at the FSB’s premises, the second applicant reported to the investigator, who invited her for questioning. Later on that date they received additional information to the effect that the second applicant had been placed on an international wanted list. After the second applicant’s questioning, some time after 2.45 p.m., officer Z. informed the investigator and the second applicant of that new information. The second applicant stated that she was aware of the fact. Officer Z. then contacted the Meshchanskiy District Office of the Interior, where he handed over procedural documents received from the Tajikistani authorities. The second applicant was escorted to the Office of the Interior in order for it to proceed with her detention. In the evening of 19 May 2011 officer Z. met with E., who presented herself as the second applicant’s lawyer and said that she had submitted complaints concerning the FSB officers’ actions before the Prosecutor’s Office and the Meshchanskiy District Court.
On 20 June 2011 FSB officer L. also submitted a report to his superior concerning the events of 19 May 2011. The content of the report is similar to that of officer Z.
By a decision of 1 July 2011 the Meshchanskiy District Court of Moscow discontinued the proceedings as regards the complaint that the second applicant had been arrested and forcibly taken to the Moscow Department of the FSB’s premises. The court noted in this respect that under Article 125 of the Russian Code of Criminal Procedure it was only possible to challenge before a court the actions of officers who had carried out operational and search activities if those officers had acted on the instructions of an investigator or investigating body. In the present case, according to the Meshchanskiy District Court of Moscow, investigator G. had never instructed the FSB officers to arrest the second applicant and take her to the Moscow Department of the FSB’s premises, and therefore the lawfulness of their actions could not be reviewed under Article 125 of the Russian Code of Criminal Procedure. The court dismissed the complaint concerning the alleged breach of the right to legal assistance during questioning, having found that the second applicant had not requested the assistance of a lawyer.
On 1 August 2011 the Moscow City Court upheld the decision of 1 July 2011 on appeal. It stated, in particular, that the court of first instance had been justified in discontinuing the proceedings, having established that the FSB officers had served the summons on the second applicant and then, upon her request, “had given her a lift in their car” to the Moscow Department of the FSB’s premises.
On 20 May 2011, upon the request of the Meshchanskiy InterDistrict Prosecutor’s Office, the Meshchanskiy District Court of Moscow ordered the second applicant’s detention for a period of two months, that is until 19 July 2011. At the hearing the second applicant argued that the extension of her detention would be unlawful and unjustified, because: she had good character references; she had not been subject to criminal prosecution in Russia; she had a permanent place of residence which she had registered and three minor children; and because in her view she could not lawfully be extradited to Tajikistan. The court stated that her detention was necessary in order to ensure her extradition to , where she was charged with having committed a criminal offence under Article 307 of the Tajikistani Criminal Code.
The second applicant and her lawyer each lodged an appeal against the decision of the Meshchanskiy District Court of Moscow.
On 8 June 2011 the Moscow City Court examined the appeal lodged by the second applicant’s lawyer and rejected it, holding that the decision of the Meshchanskiy District Court of Moscow was well-reasoned and correctly decided. It does not appear that the Moscow City Court examined the second applicant’s appeal.
On 13 July 2011 the Meshchanskiy District Court of Moscow, with reference to Article 109 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, further extended the second applicant’s detention until 19 November 2011. The court, referring to the second applicant’s being placed on an international wanted list and the fact that the extradition check in her respect had not been completed, found that there were sufficient grounds to believe that she might “abscond or impede the proceedings in her criminal case and the establishment of the truth”.
The second applicant and her lawyer each lodged an appeal against the decision of the Meshchanskiy District Court of Moscow. The second applicant’s counsel submitted a four-page statement of appeal on 15 July 2011. It was received by the court on the same date. She argued that in the decision of 13 July 2011 the court had failed to indicate the progress of the extradition proceedings, that the grounds for the extension of detention had not been sufficiently specific, that the court had not attached due weight to the second applicant’s being the mother of three minor children, and that overall the decision was unlawful and unjustified. The second applicant also submitted an appeal statement on 15 July 2011 via the administration of the remand prison she was being held in. According to the Government, it was received by the court “shortly” before the hearing on appeal. According to the second applicant, it was received by the court on 26 July 2011. In her statement of appeal, which was one-and-a-half pages long, the second applicant pointed out that deprivation of liberty should be applied as a preventive measure only exceptionally, and that she had to take care of her three minor children.
On 1 August 2011 the Moscow City Court upheld the decision of 13 July 2001 as lawful and valid. The court examined the appeal lodged by the second applicant’s lawyer but not that lodged by the applicant. The second applicant’s lawyer was present at the hearing but did not draw the court’s attention to the fact that the second applicant had also brought an appeal. The Moscow City Court, in particular, agreed with the Meshchanskiy District Court of Moscow that the extension of detention as a preventive measure was justified by the second applicant’s being placed on a wanted list and by the pending extradition check in her respect. The Moscow City Court also noted that the second applicant’s children had been placed in the care of social services.
On 23 May 2011 the Moscow Region Department of the Federal Migration Service informed the Meshchanskiy Inter-District Prosecutor’s Office that the second applicant had never registered her residence in the Moscow Region, nor had she ever acquired Russian nationality.
On 24 May 2011 the Moscow Department of the Federal Migration Service informed the Meshchanskiy Inter-District Prosecutor’s Office that the second applicant had been registered in the migration register (миграционный учет) as a foreign national living in Moscow from 16 April to 12 July 2011 and that she had not applied for Russian nationality.
It appears that the Russian Prosecutor General’s Office received a request for the second applicant’s extradition from the Tajikistani Prosecutor General’s Office on 6 July 2011.
On 18 October 2011 the second applicant’s lawyer asked the Russian Prosecutor General’s Office to refuse the Tajikistani authorities’ request for her extradition, stating that she ran a serious risk of being subjected to torture if extradited.
By letter of 16 November 2011 the Russian Prosecutor General’s Office stated that it had refused the Tajikistani’s authorities request to extradite the second applicant owing to the expiry of the statutory limitation period in respect of the offence she was charged with.
On 16 November 2011, pursuant to an order of the Meshchanskiy Inter-District Prosecutor’s Office of the same date, the second applicant was released.
On 15 December 2011 the first applicant applied to the Moscow Department of the Russian Federal Migration Service for temporary asylum.
On 15 March 2012 the Moscow Department of the Federal Migration Service refused the first applicant’s application for asylum. The decision referred to the following: (i) Tajikistan was a party to numerous international instruments concerning the protection of human rights; (ii) it had adopted a number of legislative measures in compliance with such instruments; (iii) by a decision of the Supreme Court of Russia of 14 February 2003 Hizb ut-Tahrir had been declared a terrorist organisation and its activity was prohibited in Russia; (iv) in the course of the proceedings neither the first applicant nor his representative, although it had been open to them, had provided any evidence to corroborate the assertion that the first applicant had been or would be subjected in Tajikistan to inhuman treatment; (v) the first applicant had conceded that he was a member of Hizb ut-Tahrir; (vi) although he had been in Russia since 2004 the first applicant had never applied for either asylum or a temporary residence permit, but had used forged documents in order to acquire Russian nationality; (vii) the Tajikistani authorities had provided the Russian authorities with assurances that the first applicant would not be persecuted on the grounds of his political views, race, religion or ethnic origin, he would not be subjected to inhuman treatment, he would be provided with legal assistance, he would only be prosecuted for the offences in respect of which the extradition request was granted and he would be free to leave Tajikistan upon the termination of the proceedings. The Moscow Department of the Russian Federal Migration Service thus concluded that there were no humanitarian reasons that would justify granting the first applicant temporary asylum.
On 24 April 2012 the first applicant appealed against the refusal. He referred to the high risk of ill-treatment if extradited to  since he was charged with involvement in Hizb ut-Tahrir. In this connection he referred to relevant international reports and the Court’s judgments.
On 18 May 2012 the Russian Federal Migration Service quashed the decision of the Moscow Department of the Federal Migration Service of 15 March 2012. It stated that the latter had carried out an appropriate analysis of the relevant issues and had reached reasonable conclusions. However, in view of the fact that, following the first applicant’s request, the Court had indicated a measure under Rule 39 so as to prevent his extradition to Tajikistan, it was necessary to re-examine the possibility of providing him with temporary asylum so as to settle his legal status in Russia and provide additional guarantees that he would not be extradited to Tajikistan until the Court had delivered a final decision in his case.
On 17 August 2012 the Moscow Department of the Federal Migration Service granted the first applicant temporary asylum until 17 August 2013.
On 24 May 2011 the second applicant asked the Moscow Department of the Russian Federal Migration Service to grant her refugee status.
By a decision of 29 July 2011 the Moscow Department of the Federal Migration Service refused the second applicant’s request, stating that she had not met the criteria established by applicable law.
The second applicant challenged that decision before the Russian Federal Migration Service. In a decision of 29 November 2011 that authority dismissed her complaint and upheld the decision of 29 July 2011.
On 29 December 2011 the second applicant challenged the decision of 29 November 2011 before the courts.
On 22 February 2012 the Basmanniy District Court of Moscow upheld the decision of the Federal Migration Service.
On 18 June 2012 the Moscow City Court upheld the decision of the Basmanniy District Court on appeal.
Meanwhile, on 21 November 2012 the second applicant asked the Moscow Department of the Federal Migration Service to grant her temporary asylum in .
On 17 February 2012 the Moscow Department of the Federal Migration Service refused the second applicant’s request on account of a lack of humanitarian reasons that would justify granting her asylum. The decision noted that the second applicant and her representatives had failed to corroborate the alleged risk of ill-treatment in Tajikistan and concluded that the sole purpose of the application had been to legalise the second applicant’s residence in .
The second applicant challenged the refusal before the Russian Federal Migration Service.
On 21 August 2012 the Russian Federal Migration Service dismissed her complaint and upheld the decision of 17 February 2012. The Russian Federal Migration Service noted that, although the applicants had been living in  since 2005, they only applied for refugee status in 2011 after they had been placed in custody. It further noted that the second applicant had submitted in writing, certified by a notary, that she had consented to her brother taking her children to Tajikistan so as to prevent them from being placed in in the care of social services in either Russia or Tajikistan and thereby preventing the Tajikistani authorities from putting pressure on her. The Russian Federal Migration Service observed that this statement was self-contradictory: the second applicant had thus voluntarily arranged for her children to be sent to the very State which she was allegedly afraid of being pressured by, whereas in  her children had been outside the jurisdiction of the Tajikistani authorities. They considered that it further proved that the second applicant’s allegations of there being a risk of ill-treatment in Tajikistan were unsubstantiated and agreed with the Moscow Department of the Federal Migration Service that the sole purpose of the application had been to legalise the second applicant’s residence in .
On 22 September 2012 the second applicant brought a complaint against the decision of 21 August 2012 before the Federal Migration Service’s Nationality Department. It appears that the complaint is pending.
Article 5 § 15 of the Russian Code of Criminal Procedure defines “the actual time of arrest” as the time at which a person is actually deprived of his or her freedom of movement, performed in accordance with the procedure established by the Code.
Chapter 13 (“Arrest of a suspect”) regulates arrest (задержание). Article 91 sets out the grounds for the arrest of a suspect. Article 91 § 1 provides that an investigator or a prosecutor have the right to arrest a suspect on suspicion of his/her having committed a crime punishable by deprivation of liberty on one of the following grounds:
the person is caught while the crime is being committed or immediately afterwards;
the victim or witnesses identify the person as the perpetrator of the crime;
clear evidence of a crime is discovered on the person, his/her clothing or in his/her place of residence.
Article 91 § 2 provides that a suspect can also be arrested if he or she has tried to flee, or does not have a permanent residence, or if his/her identity has not been established, or if the prosecutor or the investigator have applied to the court seeking the individual’s detention as a preventive measure.
Article 92 sets out the procedure for the arrest of a suspect. A record of arrest must be drawn up within three hours of the time the suspect is brought to the investigating authorities or the prosecutor. The record of arrest must include the date, time, place, grounds and reasons for the arrest. It should be signed by the suspect and the person who carried out the arrest. Within twelve hours of the time of the arrest the investigator must notify the prosecutor of it in writing. The suspect must be questioned in accordance with established questioning procedure and a lawyer must be provided for him/her at his/her request. Before questioning the suspect has the right to a confidential two-hour meeting with a lawyer.
Under Article 94, if a judge does not order remand of the suspect in custody as a preventive measure within forty-eight hours of arrest, the suspect should be immediately released.
Chapter 13 (“Measures of restraint”) governs the use of measures of restraint, or preventive measures (меры пресечения), which include, in particular, remand in custody. Custody may be ordered by a court on an application by the investigator or the prosecutor if the person is charged with an offence carrying a sentence of at least two years’ imprisonment, provided that a less restrictive measure of restraint cannot be used (Article 108 §§ 1 and 3). The period of detention pending investigation may not exceed two months (Article 109 § 1). A judge may extend that period up to six months (Article 109 § 2). Further extensions of up to twelve months, or in exceptional circumstances, up to eighteen months, may only be granted if the person is charged with serious or particularly serious criminal offences (Article 109 § 3). No extension beyond eighteen months is permissible and the detainee must be released immediately (Article 109 § 4).
Chapter 54 (“Extradition of a person for criminal prosecution or execution of sentence”) regulates extradition. Upon receipt of a request for extradition not accompanied by an arrest warrant issued by a foreign court, the prosecutor must decide on the preventive measure in respect of the person whose extradition is sought. The measure must be applied in accordance with established procedure (Article 466 § 1). If a request for extradition is accompanied by an arrest warrant issued by a foreign court, the prosecutor may impose house arrest on the person or place him/her in custody “without seeking confirmation of the validity of that order from a Russian court” (Article 466 § 2).
Article 125 sets out the judicial procedure for the examination of complaints. Orders of an investigator or prosecutor refusing to institute criminal proceedings or terminating a case, and other orders and acts or omissions which are liable to infringe upon the constitutional rights and freedoms of the parties to criminal proceedings or to hinder citizens’ access to justice, may be appealed against to a local district court, which is competent to check the lawfulness and grounds of the impugned decisions.
Article 133 provides for the right to redress with respect to unlawful criminal prosecution. Redress includes compensation of pecuniary damage, “remedying the consequences” of non-pecuniary damage and the reinstatement of labour, pension, housing and other rights. Damage is to be compensated by the State in full, regardless of the liability of the law-enforcement bodies. Paragraph 2 endows the right to redress to any person who was acquitted or against whom criminal proceedings have been discontinued. Paragraph 3 extends the right to compensation to any person unlawfully subjected to preventive measures in the course of criminal proceedings.
Article 167 § 1 states that, if a person participating in an investigative action refuses to sign a record of the investigative action, the investigator shall note this refusal down in the record and certify it with his or her signature, as well as with the signature of the person’s lawyer if he or she has participated in the investigative action. Under Article 167 § 2 the person who refused to sign the record must be given the chance to provide reasons for the refusal, which should be reflected in the record.
Under Article 190, which regulates the transcription of questioning sessions, the person questioned must certify with his or her signature that all statements have been accurately reproduced in the transcript (Article 190 § 8). Should the person refuse to sign the transcript of questioning, the refusal must be certified in accordance with Article 167 (Article 190 § 9).
Article 389, which was in force until 1 January 2013, provided that an appeal court should re-examine the case if the statement of appeal lodged by the convicted person or his or her counsel reached the court after the case had been examined on appeal lodged by the other party to the proceedings.
On 4 April 2006 the  examined an application by Mr N., who had submitted that the lack of any limitation in time on the detention of a person pending extradition was incompatible with the constitutional guarantee against arbitrary detention. The  declared the application inadmissible. In its view, the absence of any specific regulation of detention matters in Article 466 § 1 did not create a legal lacuna incompatible with the Constitution. Article 8 § 1 of the 1993 Minsk Convention provided that, in executing a request for legal assistance, the requested party would apply its domestic law, that is, the procedure laid down in the Russian Code of Criminal Procedure. Such procedure comprised, in particular, Article 466 § 1 of the Code and the norms in its Chapter 13 (“Measures of restraint”) which, by virtue of their general character and position in Part I of the Code (“General provisions”), applied to all stages and forms of criminal proceedings, including proceedings for the examination of extradition requests. Accordingly, Article 466 of the Code of Criminal Procedure did not allow the authorities to apply a custodial measure without complying with the procedure established in the Code of Criminal Procedure or the time-limits fixed in the Code.
The Prosecutor General asked the Constitutional Court for an official clarification of decision no. 101-O of 4 April 2006 (see above), for the purpose, in particular, of elucidating the procedure for extending a person’s detention with a view to extradition.
The  dismissed the request on the grounds that it was not competent to indicate specific provisions of the criminal law governing the procedure and time-limits for holding a person in custody with a view to extradition. That was a matter for the courts of general jurisdiction.
The  reiterated its settled case-law to the effect that the scope of the constitutional right to liberty and personal inviolability was the same for foreign nationals and stateless persons as for Russian nationals. A foreign national or stateless person may not be detained in  for more than forty-eight hours without a judicial decision. That constitutional requirement served as a guarantee against excessively long detention beyond forty-eight hours, and also against arbitrary detention, in that it required a court to examine whether an arrest had been lawful and justified.
The Constitutional Court held that Article 466 § 1 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, read in conjunction with the Minsk Convention, could not be construed as permitting the detention of an individual for more than forty-eight hours on the basis of a request for his or her extradition without a decision by a Russian court. A custodial measure could be applied only in accordance with the procedure established in the Russian Code of Criminal Procedure and within the time-limits fixed in the Code.
By this decision the Constitutional Court dismissed as inadmissible a request for constitutional review of Article 466 § 2 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, stating that this provision “does not establish timelimits for custodial detention and does not establish the reasons and procedure for choosing a preventive measure, it merely confirms a prosecutor’s power to execute a decision already delivered by a competent judicial body of a foreign state to detain an accused. Therefore the disputed norm cannot be considered to violate the constitutional rights of [the claimant] ...”
The  examined “conveying” (доставление) in administrative proceedings. It noted that conveying is a coercive administrative measure which consists of the short-term restriction of a person’s freedom of movement and the person’s being taken from the place where an administrative offence has been committed and brought before a competent authority.
The  observed that the relevant legislation provides that conveying should be performed as quickly as possible. It does not set any precise time-limit, as it would be impossible either to foresee or to take into account particular circumstances which might affect its duration, such as distance, the availability and state of repair of the means of transport used, traffic, meteorological conditions, the person’s state of health and other factors. The  stated that: the application of this measure may not be arbitrary; the restriction of the person’s rights should be proportionate to the real necessity in view of the circumstances of the case; and the duration of the measure must be reasonable.
The Constitutional Court dismissed a complaint that Articles 5 § 15, 91 and 92 of the Code of Criminal Procedure were unconstitutional because they did not include the time taken to bring (доставление) a suspect before a competent authority into the overall duration of arrest. The Constitutional Court found that Article 92 expressly provides for the actual time of arrest as defined in Article 5 § 15 to be indicted in the record of arrest, which rules out arbitrary deprivation of liberty outside the set time-limits.
By a decision of 14 February 2003 the Supreme Court of the Russian Federation granted an application made by the Prosecutor General and classified a number of international and regional organisations as terrorist organisations, including Hizb ut-Tahrir (also known as the Party of Islamist Liberation), and prohibited their activities on Russian soil. It held that Hizb ut-Tahrir aimed to overthrow non-Islamist governments and to establish “Islamist governance on an international scale by reviving a Worldwide Islamist Caliphate”, in the first place in regions with predominantly Muslim populations, including  and other members of the Commonwealth of Independent States.
By Directive Decision No.1 adopted by the Plenary Session of the Supreme Court of the Russian Federation on 10 February 2009, the Plenary Session issued several instructions to the courts on the application of Article 125 of the Code of Criminal Procedure. The Plenary reiterated that any party to criminal proceedings or other person whose rights and freedoms were affected by the actions or inaction of the investigating or prosecuting authorities in criminal proceedings could use Article 125 of the Code of Criminal Procedure to challenge a refusal to institute criminal proceedings or a decision to terminate them. The Plenary stated that whilst the bulk of decisions amenable to judicial review under Article 125 also included decisions to institute criminal proceedings, refusals to admit a defence counsel or to grant victim status, a person could not rely on Article 125 to challenge a court’s decision to apply bail or house arrest or to remand a person in custody. It was further stressed that in declaring a specific action or inaction of a law enforcement authority unlawful or unjustified, a judge was not entitled to annul the impugned decision or to oblige the official responsible to annul it but could only ask him or her to rectify the shortcomings indicated. Should the authority concerned fail to comply with the court’s instructions, an interested party could complain to a court about the authority’s inaction and the court could issue a special ruling (частное определение), drawing the authority’s attention to the situation. Lastly, the decision stated that a prosecutor’s decision to place a person under house arrest or to remand him/her in custody with a view to extradition could be appealed against to a court under Article 125 of the Code of Criminal Procedure.
On 29 October 2009 the Plenary Session of the Russian Supreme Court adopted Directive Decision No. 22, stating that, pursuant to Article 466 § 1 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, only a court could order the remand in custody of a person in respect of whom an extradition check was pending and where the authorities of the country requesting extradition had not submitted a court decision to place him/her in custody. The judicial authorisation of remand in custody in that situation was to be carried out in accordance with Article 108 of the Code of Criminal Procedure and following a prosecutor’s petition to place that person in custody. In deciding to remand the person in custody the court was to examine if there existed factual and legal grounds for applying the preventive measure. If the extradition request was accompanied by a detention order of a foreign court, the prosecutor was competent to remand the person in custody without the authorisation of a Russian court (Article 466 § 2 of the Code of Criminal Procedure) for a period not exceeding two months, and the prosecutor’s decision could be challenged in the courts under Article 125 of the Code of Criminal Procedure. When extending the person’s detention with a view to extradition the court was to apply Article 109 of the Code of Criminal Procedure.
Recommendation No. R (98) 13 of the Council of Europe Committee of Ministers to Member States on the right of rejected asylum seekers to an effective remedy against decisions on expulsion in the context of Article 3 of the European Convention on Human Rights, adopted on 18 September 1998, reads as follows:
“The Committee of Ministers ...
Without prejudice to the exercise of any right of rejected asylum seekers to appeal against a negative decision on their asylum request, as recommended, among others, in Council of Europe Recommendation No. R (81) 16 of the Committee of Ministers,
Recommends that governments of member states, while applying their own procedural rules, ensure that the following guarantees are complied with in their legislation or practice:
An effective remedy before a national authority should be provided for any asylum seeker whose request for refugee status is rejected and who is subject to expulsion to a country about which that person presents an arguable claim that he or she would be subjected to torture or inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment.
In applying paragraph 1 of this recommendation, a remedy before a national authority is considered effective when: ...
2.  that authority has competence both to decide on the existence of the conditions provided for by Article 3 of the Convention and to grant appropriate relief; ...
4.  the execution of the expulsion order is suspended until a decision under 2.2 is taken.”
The Council of Europe Commissioner for Human Rights issued a Recommendation (CommDH(2001)19) on 19 September 2001 concerning the rights of aliens wishing to enter a Council of Europe Member State and the enforcement of expulsion orders, part of which reads as follows:
“11.  It is essential that the right of judicial remedy within the meaning of Article 13 of the ECHR be not only guaranteed in law but also granted in practice when a person alleges that the competent authorities have contravened or are likely to contravene a right guaranteed by the ECHR. The right of effective remedy must be guaranteed to anyone wishing to challenge a refoulement or expulsion order. It must be capable of suspending enforcement of an expulsion order, at least where contravention of Articles 2 or 3 of the ECHR is alleged.”
For other relevant documents, see the Court’s judgment in the case of Gebremedhin [Gaberamadhien] v. , no. 25389/05, §§ 36-38, ECHR 2007 V.
The following provisions of the Minsk Convention govern extradition proceedings:
Article 8. Carrying out of requests for assistance
“1.  When carrying out a request [поручение] for legal assistance the requested agency shall apply the laws of its country. Upon a demand of the requesting agency it may apply the procedural rules of the requesting Contracting Party, unless they contradict the legislation of the requested Contracting Party.”
Article 60. Search for and arrest for [the purpose of] extradition
“Upon receipt of an extradition request the requested Contracting Party shall immediately take measures to search for and arrest the person whose extradition is sought, except for cases where the extradition is not possible.”
Article 61. Remand in custody or arrest before the receipt of an extradition request
“1.  The person whose extradition is sought may be remanded in custody before the receipt of an extradition request if there is a related petition. The petition must contain reference to a detention order or a judgment [приговор] that has entered into legal force and indicate that an extradition request will follow. A petition for remand in custody before the receipt of an extradition request may be transmitted by post, telegraph, telex or telefax.
The person may be arrested without the petition provided for in paragraph 1 of the present Article if there are grounds prescribed by law to suspect that the person has committed a crime which may give rise to extradition in the territory of the other Contracting Party.
The other Contracting Party must be immediately informed of remand in custody or arrest carried out before the receipt of the extradition request.”
Article 62. Release of the person arrested or remanded in custody
“1.  A person remanded in custody pursuant to Article 61 § 1 and Article 61-1 must be released upon receipt of notification from the requesting Contracting Party [that] it is necessary to release the person, or if the requesting Contracting Party fails to submit an extradition request with all requisite supporting documents provided for in Article 58 within forty days from the date of remand in custody.
A person arrested under Article 61 § 2 must be released if the petition for detention in accordance with Article 61 § 1 is not received within the time-limit provided for by legislation governing detention matters.”
The Concluding Observations on the Second Periodic Report on Tajikistan, issued by the UN Committee against Torture on 20 November 2012 (CAT/C/TJK/2), pointed out the following areas of concern regarding the human rights situation in the country:
“While the Committee welcomes the incorporation of article 143-1 into the Criminal Code to bring the definition of torture fully in line with article 1 the Convention, it expresses concern that the sanctions envisaged of five years imprisonment or less for first-time offenders of torture are not commensurate with the gravity of the crime[.]
...
The Committee is deeply concerned that the 2011 Law on Amnesty grants a rather wide discretion to prosecutorial bodies to commute, reduce or suspend sentences of persons convicted of torture, including the case of three police officers convicted for their involvement in death in custody of Mr. Ismoil Bachajonov[.]
...
The Committee takes note of the procedural safeguards introduced in the 2010 Code of Criminal Procedure (CPC), including the registration of detainees within three hours of arrival at the police station (art.94.1), the right to have a lawyer (art.22.1 and art.49.2), and the right not to be detained for more than 72 hours from the moment of arrest (art.92.3). However, the Committee expresses concern that the lack of clarity on when the person is considered to be detained under this law (article 91.1) leaves detainees without basic legal safeguards for the period between arrest and official acknowledgement of detention. It has been reported that, in practice and in the majority of cases, detainees are not afforded the rights of timely access to a lawyer and an independent doctor, notification of family members, and other legal guarantees to ensure their protection from torture. In particular, the Committee is concerned by numerous allegations regarding the failure of police officials to keep accurate records of all periods of deprivation of liberty; to register suspects within three hours of arrival at the police station; to adhere to the 72-hour time limit for releasing or transferring suspects from a police station to pre-trial detention facilities; and to notify family members of transfers of detainees from one place of deprivation of liberty to another. Furthermore, it is concerned that article 111-1 of the CPC allows judges to authorize pre-trial detention solely based on the gravity of the alleged crime committed, and that it can be extended up to 18 months[.]
...
The Committee is seriously concerned by numerous and consistent allegations, corroborated by various sources, of routine use of torture and ill-treatment of suspects, principally to extract confessions to be used in criminal proceedings, primarily during the first hours of interrogation in police custody as well as in temporary and pre-trial detention facilities run by the State Committee of National Security and the Department for the Fight against Organized Crime[.]
...
The Committee is concerned at reports from the State party and non-governmental organizations on several instances of deaths in custody, including the deaths of Messrs. Ismonboy Boboev, Usman Boboev, Khurshed Bobokalonov, Alovuddin Davlatov, Murodov Dilshodbek, Hamza Ikromzoda, Khamzali Ikromzoda, Safarali Sangov, Bahromiddin Shodiev and at the lack of effective and impartial investigations into these cases[.]
...
The Committee is deeply concerned that allegations of torture and ill-treatment are not promptly, impartially or effectively investigated and prosecuted, thus creating a climate of impunity. The Committee is further concerned that under article 28(1) of the Criminal Procedural Code (CPC), a court, judge, prosecutor, or an investigator may terminate criminal proceedings and exempt the person in question from criminal liability. Such actions can be taken on the basis of repentance, conciliation with the victim, change of circumstances, or expiration of the period of statute of limitation for criminal prosecution[.]
...
While welcoming the inclusion of article 88(3) to the Criminal Procedural Code in March 2008, which provides that evidence obtained through “physical force, pressure, cruelty, inhumanity and by other illegal methods” may not be used as evidence in a criminal case, as well as the June 2012 decree of the Supreme Court clarifying the concept of inadmissibility of evidence obtained under illegal methods, the Committee expresses concern at the lack of effective enforcement mechanisms and implementation in practice. It is also concerned by reports that judges frequently dismiss allegations of torture when raised by defendants, and that unless a formal complaint is submitted, the prosecutor will not launch an investigation[.]
...
While welcoming current efforts by the State party to improve conditions of detention in prisons and pre-trial detention facilities, the Committee is concerned by:
(a)	Reports of lack of hot water supply; inadequate sanitary conditions; poor ventilation; lack of means to dry clothes, which leads to respiratory infections and sickness; lack of personal hygiene products; and inadequate food and health care;
(b)	Unnecessarily strict regimes for inmates serving life imprisonment, who are reportedly confined in virtual isolation in their cells for up to 23 hours a day in small, airless cells; do not have access to lawyers; are only permitted visits by family members once a year; and are denied various activities in prison;
(c)	Continued lack of systematic and independent review of all places of detention by national or international monitors, including the International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC). While noting that the Ombudsman may undertake visits to places of detention, the Committee is concerned that the findings are not made public;
(d)	The lack of a complaints mechanism for detainees. Despite the information provided by the State party that complaints of torture or ill-treatment can be submitted in sealed envelopes, they reportedly do not reach the relevant authorities and prisoners often do not have access to pens and paper; and
(e)	The fact that the number, location, capacity, and the number of detainees in penitentiary institutions in  are considered as “state secrets”.
...
The Committee is concerned by reports that victims of and witnesses to torture and ill-treatment do not file complaints with the authorities for fear of reprisals and lack of adequate follow-up. Additionally, while noting the removal of libel and insult from the Criminal Code in July 2012, the Committee remains concerned by reports of harassment and intimidation of journalists and human rights defenders who report on torture and ill-treatment. In particular, the Committee is concerned by the information received that families and victims of alleged torture, journalists, lawyers, medical experts and human rights defenders who raised concerns with the United Nations Special Rapporteur on Torture and other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment during his visit to Tajikistan in May 2012 have subsequently faced harassment and intimidation from authorities. Furthermore, while the Committee takes note of the information provided by the delegation, it is nevertheless concerned by the recent closure of the Association of Young Lawyers of Tajikistan (Amparo), a member of the Coalition Against Torture that engaged with the Special Rapporteur during his visit, pursuant to a motion filed by the Ministry of Justice to dissolve the organization on administrative grounds and a decision taken by the Khujand City Court on 24 October 2012 to this effect[.]
...
The Committee is concerned that the Criminal Procedure Code does not contain any provision on the absolute prohibition of extradition or deportation in cases where the subject would be at risk of torture, and that there are no clear procedures in legislation for challenging the legality before a court in extradition and deportation proceedings. It is also concerned by reports of extradition requests made by the State party of persons alleged to be members of banned Islamic groups, who, upon return to , are reportedly held in incommunicado detention and in solitary confinement, and subjected to torture and/or ill-treatment by law enforcement officials. It is further concerned by allegations that persons facing risk of torture upon their return and have applied for interim measures at the European Court of Human Rights have been abducted by Tajikistani security forces in a neighbouring country and forcibly returned to , and subsequently subjected to torture and/or ill-treatment. Additionally, the Committee is concerned by reports that Abdulvosi Latipov, former member of the United Tajik Opposition, has allegedly been abducted from the Russian Federation to Tajikistan in October 2012 and is being held incommunicado[.]
...
The Committee is concerned that there is no explicit provision in domestic legislation that provides for the right of victims of torture to fair and adequate compensation, including the means for as full rehabilitation as possible, as required by article 14 of the Convention. The Committee also regrets the lack of data provided by the State party regarding the amount of any compensation awards made by the courts to victims of violations of the Convention, including those who were subjected to torture and/or ill-treatment during the period of 1995 to 1999 and 35 victims of trafficking who were returned to Tajikistan in 2007 from other countries. The Committee also notes the lack of information on any treatment and social rehabilitation services provided to victims, including medical and psychosocial rehabilitation[.]”
The chapter on  in the World Report released by Human Rights Watch in January 2012, in so far as relevant, reads as follows:
“The human rights situation in  remains poor. The government persisted with enforcing a repressive law on religion and introduced new legislation further restricting religious expression and education. Authorities continued to restrict media freedoms and journalists—including BBC correspondent Urunboy Usmonov—were targeted for their work. Domestic violence against women remains a serious problem in Tajik society. The judiciary is neither independent nor effective.
...
Criminal Justice and Torture
Torture remains an enduring problem within Tajikistan’s penitentiary system and is used to extract confessions from defendants, who are often denied access to family and legal counsel during initial detention. Despite discussions with the International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) in August, authorities have not granted ICRC access to places of detention. With rare exceptions, human rights groups are also denied access.
While torture is practiced with near impunity, authorities took a few small steps to hold perpetrators accountable. In an unprecedented ruling in September two law enforcement officers were sentenced to eight years in prison (reduced to six years under amnesty) on charges of “deliberate infliction of bodily harm carelessly resulting in the death of a victim” and “abuse of powers,” after Ismoil Bachajonov, 31, died in police custody in Dushanbe, the capital, in January. A third officer was sentenced to three years in prison on charges of “negligence,” but was released under amnesty.
NGOs and local media also reported on the deaths of Safarali Sangov, 37, who was detained on March 1 on alleged drug-related charges and died in a hospital several days later, and of Bahromiddin Shodiev, 28, who was detained on October 14 and died in a hospital on October 30. Police claim that Sangov and Shodiev each tried to commit suicide at the police station, but their respective families insist that each died after sustaining injuries during beatings while in custody. In early November a Ministry of Internal Affairs spokesperson announced that there would be a “thorough investigation” into Shodiev’s death and that three officers had been dismissed. Following Sangov’s death two policemen were charged with “negligence.” Soon after the trial began in September the judge ordered that the case undergo further investigation.
In July Ilhom Ismanov and 52 other defendants were put on trial in Khujand for alleged membership in the Islamic Movement of Uzbekistan. Amnesty International reported that during a pre-trial detention hearing on November 12, 2010, the judge ignored Ismanov’s testimony that he had been tortured, including with electric shocks and boiling water, and that other defendants have since made similar allegations of torture and ill-treatment in pre-trial detention.
Freedom of Religion
Tajik authorities further tightened restrictions on religious freedoms, and pursuant to newly adopted legislation, the government now extends far reaching controls over religious education and worship. According to a June statement by Forum 18, authorities continue “to try to suppress unregistered Muslim education throughout the country” and “have brought administrative charges against at least fifteen Muslim teachers in three different regions.” Authorities have also closed unregistered mosques.
On August 2 President Rahmon signed the highly controversial Parental Responsibility Law, stipulating that parents must prevent their children from participating in religious activity, except for state-sanctioned religious education, until they reach 18-years-old. Human rights groups, religious groups, and international bodies criticized the adoption of the law. In June the government passed amendments to the already restrictive 2009 religion law requiring students who wish to study at religious institutions abroad to first obtain state permission.
Under the pretext of combating extremist threats,  continues to ban several peaceful minority Muslim groups. Christian minority denominations, such as Jehovah’s Witnesses, are similarly banned. Local media continued to report on prosecutions of alleged members of Hizb ut-Tahrir and the Jamaat Tabligh movement.”
The first applicant referred to a report by Amnesty International entitled Shattered Lives: Torture and Other Ill-treatment in Tajikistan, released in 2012, which reads, in so far as relevant:
“...
Amnesty International is extremely concerned at a number of cases in recent years where people who were extradited or forcibly returned to Tajikistan by the authorities of other countries have been tortured or ill-treated by law enforcement officers in Tajikistan ...
Amnesty International is concerned at a series of recent cases where the Tajikistani authorities have made extradition requests based on unreliable information for people alleged to be members of banned Islamic groups, who have subsequently alleged being tortured on their return. Many of these extradition requests have been issued for people in the .
...”
The first applicant further referred to the United States Department of State’s report on  for 2011, which reads, insofar as relevant:
“c.  Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or Punishment
The constitution prohibits the use of torture, but there is no specific definition of torture in the law or a provision of criminal liability for committing an act of torture. An article in the criminal procedure code (CPC) states that evidence acquired through torture is inadmissible. Some security officials reportedly continued to use beatings or other forms of coercion to extract confessions during interrogations. General Prosecutor Sherkhon Salimzoda stated during a press conference that only 13 of the 48 complaints filed in 2010 had evidence of torture. Officials did not grant sufficient access to information to allow human rights organizations to investigate claims of torture.
Urunboy Usmonov, a BBC journalist arrested and detained on June 13, claimed in a court hearing on August 18 that he was tortured while in custody. The judge refused to acknowledge Usmonov’s claims of torture during the trial. A BBC official on a visit to the country reported that Usmonov’s treatment was far worse than he alleged in court and included beatings, electrical shocks, and cigarette burns. According to the BBC official, Usmonov’s abridged testimony occurred because he feared reprisals against him and his family.”
The first applicant also referred to the End-of-mission Statement by the UN Special Rapporteur on Torture, Juan E. Méndez, giving his preliminary findings following his country visit to the  from 10 to 18 May 2012. The UN Special Rapporteur on Torture stated:
“...
In this preliminary finding let me say that pressure on detainees, mostly as a means to extract confessions is practiced in Tajikistan in various forms, including threats, beatings (with fists and kicking but also with hard objects) and sometimes by applying electric shock. I am unable to say whether the practice is less prevalent or systematic in recent times; I am, however, persuaded that it happens often enough and in a wide variety of settings that it will take a very concerted effort to abolish it or to reduce it sharply.
...”