The case originated in an application (no. 51857/13) against the Russian Federation lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Russian national, Mr Said Dzhaparovich Amirov (“the applicant”), on 12 August 2013.
The applicant was represented by Mr D. Khoroshilov, a lawyer practising in Moscow. The Russian Government (“the Government”) were represented by Mr G. Matyushkin, the Representative of the Russian Federation at the European Court of Human Rights.
The applicant alleged, in particular, that he was not receiving adequate medical assistance while in detention and that he had been remanded in custody without valid reasons.
On 16 August 2013 the President of the First Section, acting upon the applicant’s request of 13 August 2013, decided to apply Rules 39 and 41 of the Rules of Court, indicating to the Government that the applicant should be immediately examined by medical experts independent from the prison system with a view to determining (1) whether the treatment he was receiving in the temporary detention facility was adequate for his condition; (2) whether his state of health was compatible with the conditions of his detention; and (3) whether the applicant’s condition required his placement in a hospital.
On 29 August 2013, having received the Government’s reply to the Court’s letter of 16 August 2013, the President of the First Section reminded the Government of the interim measure applied under Rule 39 of the Rules of Court. The Government’s attention was also drawn to the fact that the failure of a Contracting State to comply with a measure indicated under Rule 39 could entail a breach of Article 34 of the Convention.
On 21 October 2013 the application was communicated to the Government.
The applicant was born in 1954 and prior to his arrest lived in the town of Makhachkala, Dagestan Republic. He is currently being detained in a temporary detention facility in Rostov-on-Don.
In 1993 the applicant, at the material time the deputy Prime Minister of the Dagestan Republic, survived an assassination attempt. However, his spine was badly wounded and he became paralysed. He cannot walk and is confined to a wheelchair. He also lost his ability to urinate or defecate without special medical procedures, such as catheters and enemas.
Since 1998 the applicant has been mayor of Makhachkala, the Dagestan Republic.
Сriminal proceedings were instituted against the applicant on suspicion of organised aggravated murder and attempted murder of State officials, including several prosecutors, investigators, a member of the town council and the head of the investigative committee in the Dagestan Republic. The investigation was assigned to a group of senior investigators and criminologists from the investigative committees of various regions of the Russian Federation and led by the deputy head of the Russian Federal Investigative Committee, a major-general. The applicant was arrested on 1 June 2013.
On the following day the Basmanniy District Court of Moscow ordered the applicant’s detention pending trial, citing the gravity of the charges against him and the risk that he might abscond, interfere with the investigation, in particular influence witnesses, and reoffend. The District Court’s decision was based on the applicant’s official powers and his significant contacts with various persons involved in the investigation, as well as his consequent ability to influence the investigation. The court referred to the case-file materials, according to which a number of defendants arrested on suspicion of participating in the murders were also public officials and law-enforcement agents, investigators or police officers. They had identified the applicant as the “master-mind” of the murders, had provided details of the murders and had argued that certain victims had been murdered in retaliation for their failure to obey the applicant’s orders.
At the same time, the District Court dismissed the applicant’s arguments pertaining to his poor state of health, his stable family situation, his age and his standing in the community, having considered that they did not outweigh the reasons warranting his detention. The District Court was also not convinced by the description given by the head of the Makhachkala police department portraying the applicant as “an example of compliance with the law and public order”.
The decision of 2 June 2013 was upheld on appeal on 3 July 2013 when the Moscow City Court found the District Court’s finding reasonable and convincing. The City Court also noted that no alternative measure, such as house arrest or a written undertaking, could ensure the proper course of the criminal proceedings.
On 26 July 2013 the Basmannyy District Court extended the applicant’s detention until 11 November 2013, having again linked the gravity and nature of the charges against him, as well as his standing in society, to the likelihood that he would obstruct the course of justice, reoffend or abscond. The District Court once again relied on the applicant’s connections to support the conclusion that if released he would tamper with the evidence. At the same time, the District Court took into account a medical opinion issued on 17 July 2013 (cited in detail below), according to which the applicant’s state of health did not preclude his detention in the conditions of an ordinary detention facility. It also noted that there was no evidence that the authorities had delayed the pre-trial investigation. The District Court concluded by stressing that the case was particularly complex, involved a large number of defendants and required a series of investigative steps to be taken.
On 20 September 2013 new charges were brought against the applicant. He was charged with firearms trafficking and attempting to organise a terrorist attack on a public official, his political rival. According to the investigation, the applicant and his accomplices had intended to shoot down, with a portable anti-aircraft rocket launcher, a civilian aircraft in which the public official was to travel from Makhachkala to Moscow with other passengers.
On 7 November 2013 the Basmannyy District Court accepted the investigators’ request to extend the applicant’s detention again until 28 February 2014. The District Court noted the gravity of the charges, including the new ones, and the fact that the applicant was facing a sentence of up to life imprisonment. It once again cited the risks of the applicant absconding, reoffending and obstructing the course of justice, and expressed concern for the safety of the witnesses and victims. The District Court noted that the investigation of certain criminal offences with which the applicant was charged was at an active stage and that the risk of his interfering with the investigation, if he were released, was well-founded. More than eleven defendants had been arrested and certain suspects were yet to be apprehended. The District Court placed particular weight on the complexity of the case and the progress that the investigators were making with it.
The District Court also examined in detail the arguments put forward by the defence in favour of the applicant’s release and the application of a more lenient measure of restraint. It concluded that neither his family ties nor his state of health outweighed the reasons for his continued detention. In particular, the District Court relied on the medical opinions of 17 July and 7 August 2013, which had found that the applicant’s illness was not among those listed in Governmental Decree no. 3 of 14 January 2011 preventing the detention of a suspect. It further stressed that on a daily basis at least three medical specialists from municipal and State medical facilities (“generalists, surgeons, neurologists, urologists, endocrinologists, proctologists, an infectious diseases specialist, and a rehabilitation specialist”) had examined the applicant and that he had received the prescribed drug treatment in full. Moreover, he had undergone all the necessary laboratory testing and clinical examinations in certified civilian laboratories in Moscow and on 5 November 2013 he was to undergo yet another expert examination to determine whether he was suffering from any illness warranting his release. Having cited a long list of the applicant’s illnesses, the District Court noted that there was no evidence that his condition had deteriorated or that he required treatment in a specialised medical facility. The District Court dismissed as unreliable various expert opinions and medical records prepared by specialists, including foreign ones, in various related fields of medicine and produced by the defence in support of their argument that the applicant’s life was being put at risk by his prolonged detention in the conditions of an ordinary detention facility and in the absence of adequate medical assistance.
On 25 February 2014 the Basmannyy District Court extended the applicant’s detention until 1 June 2014. Having again assessed the materials presented to it by the investigation and the defence, the District Court concluded that the risks of the applicant influencing witnesses, reoffending, obstructing the investigation by other means and absconding were still present. In particular, the criminal proceedings against the applicant were at a crucial stage of collecting evidence and there was a risk that, using his connections in the criminal underworld, the applicant might try to influence witnesses and victims who feared him. The District Court also cited the medical reports of 17 July, 7 August and 8 November 2013, which supported its conclusion that the applicant’s state of health did not preclude his further detention.
It appears that the applicant’s detention was further extended. However, neither party provided the Court with an update.
On 9 July 2014 the North-Caucasian Military Court found the applicant guilty of conspiring to organise a terrorist attack and sentenced him to ten years’ imprisonment. The applicant was stripped of all State awards and commendations. It appears that the criminal proceedings on the remaining charges against the applicant are still pending.
Numerous medical certificates and expert opinions submitted by the parties show that the applicant is suffering from a spinal cord injury, paraplegia, chronic urinary tract infection, chronic pyelonephritis (kidney infection), chronic urinary retention, rectal prolapse (a condition in which the rectum protrudes out of the anus), paraproctitis (an inflammation of the cellular tissues surrounding the rectum), ischemic heart disease, chronic heart failure, hypertension, a thyroid gland disease, hepatitis C and non-insulin-dependent diabetes.
At the request of the applicant’s representatives a panel comprising experts in neurology, urology and general medicine examined the applicant’s medical records dating from the period between 2001 and 2008. Their report dated 2 July 2013 found that, due to his inability to satisfy his most basic needs (such as moving, urinating or defecating) without help and to his very serious diseases, the applicant required constant medical supervision, treatment and assistance and that he should therefore be placed in a specialised medical facility. His detention in a temporary detention facility could aggravate his condition and, in the absence of a swift reaction to such an aggravation, could result in his death. The report also found that the applicant was suffering from diseases which, according to Governmental Decree no. 3 of 14 January 2011, were incompatible with detention.
On 17 July 2013 a panel of three doctors from State hospital no. 20 in Moscow examined the applicant at the investigator’s request. Having studied the applicant’s medical history, the results of his recent clinical blood and urine analyses, as well as the results of his ultrasound scan and MRT examinations, the doctors confirmed the diagnoses and found that the applicant “was not suffering from any of the serious diseases included in the list of serious illnesses precluding detention of a suspect or an accused”. The report did not indicate the field of medicine in which the doctors specialised.
In response to a request by the investigator, on 25 July 2013 the director of the medical unit of temporary detention facility (SIZO-2) in Moscow, where the applicant was detained, prepared a certificate describing the applicant’s state of health. Citing extracts from the medical records, the director reported that the applicant was examined by him almost every day and also by various specialist doctors, including a urologist, a neurologist, a surgeon, a cardiologist and an endocrinologist. Blood and urine tests were regularly performed. He was prescribed and administered various medications. The applicant used disposable catheters to urinate. He performed that procedure himself, as he had done before his arrest, up to ten times a day without the facility administration having the possibility of ensuring the requisite level of asepsis. An enema was carried out by a doctor two or three times a week to make the applicant defecate. The applicant’s condition was stable and no deterioration in his health had been noted, although he had continued to raise various health complaints.
At the same time, the director of the medical unit also noted that, because the applicant was confined to a wheelchair, he could not be transported to the medical unit of the detention facility. He was therefore held in an ordinary cell where he was visited by the doctors and where all the necessary medical procedures were performed. In particular, the neighbouring cell which was used to perform the enemas was not suitable for that medical procedure as it was difficult to ensure the requisite sterility. The director stressed that lack of sterility could result in a serious complication.
The applicant’s lawyers submitted the medical report of 17 July 2013 for assessment by two medical specialists: a deputy president of the Russian Scientific Society of Medical Experts, academician and honorary doctor of the Russian Federation, Mr K.; and a member of the Russian and International Neurosurgeons’ Association, academician and highly respected professor-neurosurgeon, Mr S. On 25 July 2013 the two experts issued their review of the report. Having noticed the lack of information on the medical qualifications and specialisation of the three doctors who had issued the report, the two experts considered that the report contained a number of “significant and important contradictions”. In particular:
-  a urologist had not examined the applicant or participated in the preparation of the report of 17 July 2013, even though the applicant was suffering from a serious urological disorder;
-  although the three doctors had been provided with a complete set of medical records comprising the applicant’s medical history, including those related to his injuries and complications, the report was only based on “fragments of that information”; major complications arising from the applicant’s condition, such as chronic cystitis and pyelonephritis, remained unassessed;
-  Governmental Decree no. 3 of 14 January 2011 listed, among the serious illnesses precluding the detention of a suspect, “serious progressive forms of atrophic and degenerative illnesses of the nervous system accompanied by a stable disorder of the motor, sensory and vegeto-trophic functions”, which fully corresponded to the applicant’s diagnosis. However, that medical condition had not been taken into account by the three doctors who had prepared the report of 17 July 2013;
-  the applicant was also suffering from a life-threatening post-traumatic pathology of the kidneys and urinary tracts. However, despite the fact that a similar condition was also listed by the Governmental decree among the illnesses precluding detention, the three doctors had paid no attention to it.
The two experts concluded that the report of 17 July 2013 was incomplete and was not objective, as it did not fully reflect the “true picture of [the applicant’s] pathology, which undoubtedly fell within the serious illnesses precluding detention pending trial, as determined by Governmental Decree no. 3 of 14 January 2011”.
On 7 August 2013 the three doctors from hospital no. 20 issued another report confirming the findings in their previous report of 17 July 2013. The doctors again concluded that the applicant’s condition did not warrant his release as he was not suffering from any illness listed in Governmental Decree no. 3. The findings of the two reports were similar, the only difference being that part of the second report was based on more recent clinical tests and examinations of the applicant.
On 13 August 2013 the applicant asked the Court to apply Rule 39 of the Rules of Court and to authorise his transfer to a specialised medical facility as an interim measure.
The applicant claimed that the medical assistance he was receiving in the temporary detention facility was insufficient in view of his very serious diseases, which required constant medical supervision by specialised medical staff. The facility’s medical staff were not competent to deal with such serious conditions. The treatment he was receiving there did not correspond to the treatment he had received before his arrest. Moreover, he was unable to satisfy his most basic needs without help. In particular, when he wanted to defecate, he had to wait, suffering, until an external specialist was called, as the facility staff were not qualified to carry out an enema. According to the applicant, such inadequate medical assistance could result in a brutal aggravation of his condition and ultimate death.
On 16 August 2013 the Court decided to indicate to the Russian Government, under Rule 39 of the Rules of Court, that it was desirable in the interests of the proper conduct of the proceedings that the applicant be immediately examined by medical experts independent from the prison system with a view to determining: (1) whether the treatment he was receiving in the detention facility was adequate for his condition; (2) whether his current state of health was compatible with detention in the conditions of a detention facility; and (3) whether his current condition required his placement in a hospital.
On 26 August 2013 the Government responded to the Court’s letter of 16 August 2013, having submitted a handwritten copy of the report prepared when the applicant was examined on admission to the detention facility SIZO-2 in Moscow; documents showing that the detention facility was licensed to provide medical services to inmates; certificates issued jointly by the head of the detention facility and the director of its medical unit describing the state of the applicant’s health and listing the medical procedures to which he had been subjected; extracts from the applicant’s medical history dating back to 2007; a certificate issued by the same two officials informing the Court that there was no risk to the applicant’s life and limb and that his condition was considered stable; a handwritten copy of the applicant’s medical record drawn up in the detention facility in which the most recent entry had been made on 21 August 2013 by a prison doctor; a record drawn up during the applicant’s stay in hospital no. 20 in Moscow from 11 to 17 July 2013, noting the applicant’s diagnosis and assessing his condition as moderately serious; a medical record from a psychiatric prison hospital where he had stayed from 12 to 17 June 2013 and where he had been treated for an “adaptation disorder affecting emotions and behaviour”; copies of the two medical reports issued on 17 July and 7 August 2013, respectively, by a medical commission of three doctors from hospital no. 20 who, having cited the applicant’s medical history and the results of his examinations by various specialists and clinical tests performed in the hospital in July 2013 and the beginning of August 2013, concluded that the applicant was “not suffering from an illness included in the list of serious illnesses precluding detention of suspected or accused persons”.
The Government also answered the three questions which, in its letter of 16 August 2013, the Court had asked them to address to independent medical experts. In particular, having provided an answer to the first question related to the adequacy of the applicant’s treatment, the Government stressed that the applicant had been placed under dynamic medical supervision by the medical personnel of the detention facility in relation to illnesses of the musculoskeletal, endocrine, hepatobiliary and urinary systems. They acknowledged that the applicant, as a wheelchair- bound inmate, required systematic care and permanent medical attention, which were being provided to him in a special cell. He was performing the remaining hygiene procedures himself. The Government submitted that the applicant received the necessary medical attention and that no additional medical procedures were required.
In their response to the second question about the compatibility of the applicant’s state of health with the conditions of the detention facility, the Government stressed that the applicant was under the medical supervision of the personnel of the detention facility and was also being seen by various civilian medical specialists. The prison doctors were fully complying with the treatment plan developed by the civilian specialists.
In replying to the third question as to whether the applicant needed to be transferred to a hospital, the Government relied on the two reports issued by the three doctors from hospital no. 20 on 17 July and 7 August 2013, according to which the applicant was not suffering from any condition included in the list of serious illnesses precluding the detention of suspected and accused persons in detention facilities, as provided for by in Decree no. 3 of the Government of the Russian Federation of 14 January 2011.
On 29 August 2013 the Court reminded the Russian Government that on 16 August 2013 an interim measure had been imposed under Rule 39 of the Rules of Court, in accordance with which independent medical experts were to examine the applicant and provide their expert opinion on the three questions, assessing the quality of the applicant’s treatment, the compatibility of his state of health with the conditions of the detention facility and the need to transfer him to a hospital. The Government’s attention was also drawn to the fact that the failure of a Contracting State to comply with a measure indicated under Rule 39 may entail a breach of Article 34 of the Convention.
On 13 September 2013 the Government submitted an English translation of their submissions of 26 August 2013.
The applicant submitted a large number of medical reports and opinions issued by various Russian and foreign experts. In particular, he provided the Court with a copy of an opinion issued by Dr P. of the Nurnberg Centre of Gastroenterology in Germany, where he had undergone treatment on a number of occasions since 2004. The doctor who had attended to the applicant on those occasions stressed that he was in need of permanent medical supervision by qualified specialists. The lack of such assistance, in the doctor’s opinion, was life-threatening. He also noted that the conditions of a detention facility were not suitable for a person in the applicant’s state of health.
The applicant also provided the Court with an assessment report issued on 15 August 2013 by a deputy president of the Russian Scientific Society of Medical Experts, academician and honorary doctor of the Russian Federation, Dr K., in response to the medical opinion prepared on 7 August 2013 by the three doctors from hospital no. 20. Dr K. again criticised the opinion for the same defects as those identified in the previous report of 17 July 2013.
According to another report prepared on 2 August 2013 by Professor B., a surgeon from the Caspari Clinic in Munich, Germany, the applicant required complex daily medical examinations and procedures to control his diabetes, hepatitis C and urological problems. The doctor, who had treated the applicant in December 2012 and January 2013, insisted that the lack of such care would be critically dangerous for the applicant’s life.
Another medical expert from Germany, a urologist from a hospital in Dillenburg, in his opinion of 5 August 2013, described the complexity of the applicant’s health condition and listed the treatment which he should receive on a daily basis. He concluded that the applicant’s detention in the absence of such treatment posed a threat to his life.
Two more specialist reports were issued in November 2013: the first, by a professor of urology/andrology from Salzburg, Dr J.; and the second by a professor of surgery and intensive surgical medicine from the Paracelsus Private Medical University of Salzburg, Dr W. The reports were based on the applicant’s medical record and answers to their questions prepared by the applicant’s defence team. Having noted the poor sanitary conditions in which the applicant had to undergo necessary procedures and his “reduced immune system”, their prognosis for him was “very bad”, with the likelihood that “over time he would suffer from antibiotic-resistant urinary tract infection that [could] cause urosepsis with a very high risk of [death]”. Dr J. concluded that from the medical evidence before him, the applicant already had a permanent urinary tract infection which would probably soon develop into urosepsis. There was a 60% to 90% chance of developing septic shock and death in such a case, even in optimal clinical conditions. That chance became far more probable in a prison environment. The risk was even higher than for otherwise healthy paraplegic men given that the applicant was suffering from diabetes. Having listed various medical procedures and recommendations for treatment, Dr J. concluded that the applicant’s life “was in acute danger” and that “high-quality medical management of [the applicant’s] problems [was] mandatory”.
Dr W. concluded his analysis of the applicant’s health and the treatment to which he was being subjected with the following assessment:
“In my 40 years of professional experience as a surgeon, I have never encountered such inhuman, demoralizing and humiliating treatment of [a disabled person] bound to a wheelchair. A paraplegic patient has the same life expectancy as a [non-disabled] person, provided the measures described above are followed. Based on the documents presented to me, I have no reason to assume that this is the case.
Given the circumstances described here, one may expect the patient to experience severe and agonizing pain. Due to the non-existent medical care, one may anticipate severe complications or his demise.”
On 17 December 2013 Dr W. amended his expert opinion. Having again listed all the illnesses with which the applicant had been diagnosed by the Russian prison authorities, Dr W. stated as follows:
“From the medical view it is absolutely insignificant if one or more of those diseases are not in the list of serious diseases preventing the holding in custody of suspects or accused of the commission of crimes.
On the other hand, it is proved in international medical literature that the combination of all these serious diseases causes an enormous life threatening situation for [the applicant]. The patient is really very critically ill.”.
In the meantime, relying on the Court’s letter of 16 August 2013, on 27 September 2013 the applicant’s lawyers asked the investigators in the case to provide the applicant with an opportunity to be examined in person by a number of medical experts from various civilian hospitals, including those who had prepared the reports assessing the doctors’ opinions of 17 July and 7 August 2013. The lawyers insisted that the named specialists had agreed to provide their expert opinion in response to the three questions put by the Court before the Russian Government under Rule 39 of the Rules of Court.
On 3 October 2013 the lawyers received a letter from the senior investigator “fully refusing” their request. Having pointed out that the applicant had already been examined twice by doctors from hospital no. 20, a civilian hospital, and that the doctors had concluded that the applicant was not suffering from an illness included in the list of serious illnesses precluding detention pending trial, the senior investigator dismissed the request.
The lawyers sent a similar request to the director of the applicant’s detention facility. The director responded that he did not “in principle” object to such an examination by medical experts, but that the decision authorising the examination could only be taken by the investigator.
The applicant was again sent for an examination to hospital no. 20, where the three doctors confirmed their previous findings of 17 July and 7 August 2013. The new report issued on 5 November 2013 was very similar.
The lawyers also submitted to the Court a large number of certificates issued by the administration of the detention facility showing that the applicant’s daily needs in terms of medicines and medical materials, including catheters, were covered by his relatives. The director of the detention facility also confirmed that fact in his letter of 23 October 2013.
On 1 April 2014 the applicant was transferred to temporary detention facility no. 4 in Rostov-on-Don. A prison doctor attending on the applicant in that facility issued a record listing a number of visits to the applicant by various medical specialists and registering the applicant’s mounting complaints. In the same record she stated that while the applicant remained under permanent medical supervision and was subjected to regular clinical examinations, with his condition, due to those procedures, being satisfactory, any of his illnesses at any time could lead to a significant deterioration in his health and become acute or chronic, with an unpredictable prognosis for his life expectancy.
Russian law gives detailed guidelines for the provision of medical assistance to detained individuals. These guidelines, found in joint Decree no. 640/190 of the Ministry of Health and Social Development and the Ministry of Justice on the Organisation of Medical Assistance to Individuals Serving Sentences or Remanded in Custody (“the Regulation”), enacted on 17 October 2005, are applicable without exception to all detainees. In particular, section III of the Regulation sets out the initial steps to be taken by medical personnel of a detention facility on the admission of a detainee. On arrival at a temporary detention facility, all detainees should be subjected to a preliminary medical examination before they are placed in a cell shared by other inmates. The aim of the examination is to identify individuals suffering from contagious diseases and those in need of urgent medical assistance. Particular attention should be paid to individuals suffering from contagious conditions. No later than three days after the detainee’s arrival at the detention facility he or she should receive an indepth medical examination, including an X-ray. During the in-depth examination a prison doctor should register the detainee’s complaints, study his medical and personal history, record any injuries and recent tattoos, and schedule additional medical procedures, if necessary. A prison doctor should also authorise laboratory analyses to identify sexually transmitted diseases, HIV, tuberculosis and other illnesses.
Subsequent medical examinations of detainees are performed at least twice a year or following a detainee’s complaints. If a detainee’s state of health has deteriorated, medical examinations and assistance should be provided by the detention facility medical staff. In such cases a medical examination should include a general check-up and additional tests, if necessary, with the participation of the relevant specialists. The results of the examinations should be recorded in the detainee’s medical file. The detainee should be comprehensively informed about the results of the medical examinations.
Section III of the Regulation also sets out the procedure to follow in the event that the detainee refuses to undergo a medical examination or treatment. For each refusal, an entry should be made in the detainee’s medical record. A prison doctor should comprehensively explain to the detainee the consequences of his refusal to undergo the medical procedure.
Any medicines prescribed to the detainee must be taken in the presence of a doctor. In a limited number of circumstances, the head of the detention facility medical department may authorise his medical personnel to hand over a daily dose of medicines to the detainee to be taken unobserved.
The Internal Regulations of Correctional Institutions, in force since 3 November 2005, deal with every aspect of inmates’ lives in correctional institutions. In particular, paragraph 125 of the Regulations provides that inmates who are willing and able to pay for it may receive additional medical assistance. In such a situation, medical specialists from a State or municipal civilian hospital are to be called to the medical unit of the correctional institution where the inmate is being detained.
Governmental Decree no. 3 of 14 January 2011 concerning the medical examination of individuals suspected or accused of criminal offences regulates the procedure for authorising and performing a medical examination of a detainee to determine whether he or she is suffering from a serious illness preventing his or her detention. It also contains a list of such serious illnesses. A decision on the medical examination of a detainee is taken by the director of the detention facility following a written request from a detainee or his or her legal representative or a request by the head of the medical unit of that detention facility. The examination is performed by a medical commission of a facility appointed by the health service executive body of the respective region of the Russian Federation. The activities of the medical commission are determined by the Ministry of Health and Social Development of the Russian Federation.
The examination is performed within five days of the medical facility receiving the relevant order. Following the examination, the medical commission issues a report stating whether the detainee is suffering from a serious illness listed in the Decree. If a detainee who was previously examined by the medical commission experiences deterioration in his or her health, a new medical examination can be authorised.
The list of serious illnesses preventing the detention of suspected or accused persons comprises diseases affecting various systems of the human body. The sections devoted to illnesses affecting the endocrinal, nervous and urogenital systems read as follows:
Serious forms of insular diabetes accompanied by complications or stable health impairment leading to a significant reduction in vitality and requiring lengthy treatment in a specialised medical facility.
Serious disorders of the thyroid gland (if their surgical correction is impossible) and of other endocrine glands accompanied by complications or stable health impairment leading to a significant reduction in vitality and requiring lengthy treatment in a specialised medical facility.
Inflammatory diseases of the central nervous system of a progressive nature accompanied by an apparent phenomenon of focal brain damage with stable impairment affecting motor, sensory and vegeto-trophic functions, leading to a significant reduction in vitality and requiring lengthy treatment in a specialised medical facility.
Serious forms of atrophic and degenerative diseases of the nervous system of a progressive nature with stable impairment affecting motor, sensory and vegeto-trophic functions, leading to a significant reduction in vitality and requiring lengthy treatment in a specialised medical facility.
Progressive neuromuscular synapsis and muscular diseases with stable impairment affecting motor functions, leading to a significant reduction in vitality and requiring lengthy treatment in a specialised medical facility.
...
Kidney and urinary tract disorders and complications following other illnesses requiring regular extracorporal detoxification.
Kidney and urinary tract disorders accompanied by complications or stable health impairment leading to a significant reduction in vitality and requiring lengthy treatment in a specialised medical facility.
Anatomic defects (amputations) arising after an illness, or injuries leading to a significant reduction in vitality [and] requiring permanent medical supervision.”
The relevant provisions governing detention are described in the judgment of Pyatkov v. Russia (no. 61767/08, §§ 48-66, 13 November 2012).
The European Prison Rules provide a framework of guiding principles for health services. The relevant extracts from the Rules read as follows:
“Health care
Prison authorities shall safeguard the health of all prisoners in their care.
Organisation of prison health care
1  Medical services in prison shall be organised in close relation with the general health administration of the community or nation.
2  Health policy in prisons shall be integrated into, and compatible with, national health policy.
3  Prisoners shall have access to the health services available in the country without discrimination on the grounds of their legal situation.
4  Medical services in prison shall seek to detect and treat physical or mental illnesses or defects from which prisoners may suffer.
5  All necessary medical, surgical and psychiatric services including those available in the community shall be provided to the prisoner for that purpose.
Medical and health care personnel
1  Every prison shall have the services of at least one qualified general medical practitioner.
2  Arrangements shall be made to ensure at all times that a qualified medical practitioner is available without delay in cases of urgency.
...
4  Every prison shall have personnel suitably trained in health care.
Duties of the medical practitioner
1  The medical practitioner or a qualified nurse reporting to such a medical practitioner shall see every prisoner as soon as possible after admission, and shall examine them unless this is obviously unnecessary.
...
3  When examining a prisoner the medical practitioner or a qualified nurse reporting to such a medical practitioner shall pay particular attention to:
..;
diagnosing physical or mental illness and taking all measures necessary for its treatment and for the continuation of existing medical treatment;
...
1  The medical practitioner shall have the care of the physical and mental health of the prisoners and shall see, under the conditions and with a frequency consistent with health care standards in the community, all sick prisoners, all who report illness or injury and any prisoner to whom attention is specially directed.
...
Health care provision
1  Sick prisoners who require specialist treatment shall be transferred to specialised institutions or to civil hospitals when such treatment is not available in prison.
2  Where a prison service has its own hospital facilities, they shall be adequately staffed and equipped to provide the prisoners referred to them with appropriate care and treatment.”
The complexity and importance of health-care services in detention facilities was discussed by the European Committee for the Prevention of Torture in its 3rd General Report (CPT/Inf (93) 12 - Publication Date: 4 June 1993). The following are extracts from the Report:
“33.  When entering prison, all prisoners should without delay be seen by a member of the establishment’s health care service. In its reports to date the CPT has recommended that every newly arrived prisoner be properly interviewed and, if necessary, physically examined by a medical doctor as soon as possible after his admission. It should be added that in some countries, medical screening on arrival is carried out by a fully qualified nurse, who reports to a doctor. This latter approach could be considered as a more efficient use of available resources.
It is also desirable that a leaflet or booklet be handed to prisoners on their arrival, informing them of the existence and operation of the health care service and reminding them of basic measures of hygiene.
While in custody, prisoners should be able to have access to a doctor at any time, irrespective of their detention regime ... The health care service should be so organised as to enable requests to consult a doctor to be met without undue delay ...
A prison’s health care service should at least be able to provide regular out-patient consultations and emergency treatment (of course, in addition there may often be a hospital-type unit with beds) ... Further, prison doctors should be able to call upon the services of specialists.
As regards emergency treatment, a doctor should always be on call. Further, someone competent to provide first aid should always be present on prison premises, preferably someone with a recognised nursing qualification.
Out-patient treatment should be supervised, as appropriate, by health care staff; in many cases it is not sufficient for the provision of follow-up care to depend upon the initiative being taken by the prisoner.
The direct support of a fully-equipped hospital service should be available, in either a civil or prison hospital ...
A prison health care service should be able to provide medical treatment and nursing care, as well as appropriate diets, physiotherapy, rehabilitation or any other necessary special facility, in conditions comparable to those enjoyed by patients in the outside community. Provision in terms of medical, nursing and technical staff, as well as premises, installations and equipment, should be geared accordingly.
There should be appropriate supervision of the pharmacy and of the distribution of medicines. Further, the preparation of medicines should always be entrusted to qualified staff (pharmacist/nurse, etc.). ...
A medical file should be compiled for each patient, containing diagnostic information as well as an ongoing record of the patient’s evolution and of any special examinations he has undergone. In the event of a transfer, the file should be forwarded to the doctors in the receiving establishment.
Further, daily registers should be kept by health care teams, in which particular incidents relating to the patients should be mentioned. Such registers are useful in that they provide an overall view of the health care situation in the prison, at the same time as highlighting specific problems which may arise.
The smooth operation of a health care service presupposes that doctors and nursing staff are able to meet regularly and to form a working team under the authority of a senior doctor in charge of the service. ...”