The case originated in an application (no. 75378/13) against the Republic of Estonia lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a stateless person, M.T. (hereinafter “the applicant”), on behalf of her son, O.T. (see paragraphs 6 and 29-32 below), on 21 November 2013. The President of the Section acceded to the applicant’s request not to have her name disclosed (Rule 47 § 4 of the Rules of Court).
The applicant was represented by Ms K. Rekand from the Estonian Patient Advisory Association. The Estonian Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Ms M. Kuurberg, of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs.
The applicant complained that the review proceedings concerning the continued confinement of her son (O.T.) in a psychiatric institution did not meet the procedural requirements of Article 5 of the Convention, in particular concerning the use of expert (medical) evidence and her son’s inability to initiate such proceedings himself.
On 29 June 2015 the application was communicated to the Government.
The applicant was born in 1962 and lives in Tallinn.
On 27 May 2010 the Harju County Court determined that the applicant’s son, O.T. (born in 1984), had restricted active legal capacity (piiratud teovõime). It appointed the applicant as O.T.’s guardian to protect his interests in social and legal matters and in matters concerning property. The court relied on a forensic psychiatric expert opinion of 14 March 2010 according to which the applicant’s son suffered from permanent paranoid schizophrenia and was incapable of understanding or controlling his actions.
On 25 October 2010 O.T. committed acts of a sexual nature in respect of a ten-year old girl and threatened to kill the victim.
Criminal proceedings were initiated and O.T. was examined by a forensic psychiatric expert who confirmed, in an expert report dated 8 November 2010, the earlier expert findings (see paragraph 6 above). The expert furthermore added that O.T. posed a danger to society and needed coercive psychiatric treatment (psühhiaatriline sundravi). On 6 May 2011 the Harju County Court terminated the criminal proceedings and ordered that O.T. undergo coercive psychiatric treatment, which commenced on 6 June 2011.
On 14 December 2012 the applicant lodged an application with the Tartu County Court for O.T.’s coercive psychiatric treatment to be discontinued or for his inpatient treatment to be replaced by outpatient treatment. In her request, she referred to an opinion given by a medical committee – comprised of O.T.’s attending doctor and the acting head of the coercive treatment department (Dr E.K.) of the hospital where O.T. was being detained – dated 14 June 2012, which stated: “substantial contact [sisuline kontakt] with O.T. deficient [puudulik], his answers to questions are sparse, poses counter-questions. Denies the committed offence, does not consider himself mentally ill. In need of continued treatment as he poses danger to society.” The applicant considered that the opinion was not impartial and asked for a new independent expert assessment to be carried out with respect to O.T.
On 6 February 2013 the Tartu County Court dismissed the application. It relied on an opinion dated 11 December 2012 drawn up by a medical committee comprised of O.T.’s attending doctor and the head of the coercive treatment department (Dr S.K.), according to which O.T.’s mental condition had not changed. According to the opinion, substantial contact with him had been deficient, his answers to questions had been sparse, he had posed counter-questions and had made incoherent statements. During the course of the interview his facial expression had become angry from time to time, he had laughed inappropriately, and he had faked psychotic experiences. On the basis of the above, the medical committee concluded that O.T. was in need of continued psychiatric treatment. The court decided that no additional expert opinion was necessary, as under Article 403 § 1 of the Code of Criminal Procedure (Kriminaalmenetluse seadustik – “the CCrP”) (see paragraph 21 below) the opinion of the medical committee sufficed as evidence.
Following an appeal by the applicant, on 5 March 2013 the Tartu Court of Appeal quashed the above-mentioned decision because, contrary to the CCrP, the first-instance court had not examined the case in oral proceedings. The Court of Appeal noted that under Article 402-1 § 3 and Article 403 § 5 of the CCrP (see paragraph 21 below), the ordering of a new expert report had not been compulsory and the first-instance court had been entitled to rely solely on the written opinion of the medical committee or to question the attending doctor at a hearing.
On 30 April 2013 the Tartu County Court granted State-funded legal aid to O.T., and a lawyer (advokaat) was appointed to assist him.
The Tartu County Court re-examined the case at a hearing on 8 May 2013. It had at its disposal the medical committee opinion of 11 December 2012 (see paragraph 10 above). The head of the coercive treatment department, Dr S.K., who had participated in the drawing up of the medical opinion in question, was also heard by the court. He submitted that O.T. had not recovered: he did not have an understanding of what was going on, did not adhere to his treatment, and had accused his mother of poisoning him. In the doctor’s opinion, outpatient treatment was out of the question. The applicant and O.T’s legal aid lawyer expressed a wish for O.T. to be released. O.T. himself stated that he did not understand anything and did not wish to make statements.
By a decision of 8 May 2013 the County Court dismissed the applicant’s request, considering that O.T. had not recovered to such an extent that it would be possible to discontinue the coercive treatment or change from inpatient to outpatient treatment. It observed that there was no reason to doubt the conclusions of the medical committee’s opinion of 11 December 2012 or the reliability of the head of the coercive treatment department.
The applicant appealed to the Tartu Court of Appeal on 29 May 2013. She argued that it had not been established that O.T. posed a danger to himself or to society and that no independent expert assessment had been carried out. She considered the opinions given by the hospital’s own medical committee (see paragraphs 9 and 10 above and paragraph 22 below) to be superficial and repetitive in their wording. She also invoked Article 5 § 4 of the Convention, claiming that the patient himself should have been entitled at reasonable intervals to initiate proceedings during which the continued need for treatment would be assessed. She made reference to Article 402-1 § 1 of the CCrP (see paragraph 21 below) and the explanatory annex to the relevant draft legislation (see paragraph 23 below), according to which persons subjected to coercive psychiatric treatment had no such right (see paragraph 23 below).
On 4 July 2013 the Tartu Court of Appeal dismissed the appeal. It held that the applicant’s complaint about the lack of impartiality of the doctors treating O.T. was unfounded and that the County Court had rightly relied on the opinions of the medical committee and the head of the coercive treatment department. The Court of Appeal noted that an independent expert examination was mandatory in proceedings related to the initial ordering of coercive treatment. The danger to society posed by O.T. and the preconditions for applying coercive treatment had already been independently established by a court on 6 May 2011. In the proceedings at issue – which concerned the proposed discontinuation of inpatient coercive treatment or its replacement with outpatient treatment – it was not mandatory to obtain an alternative expert opinion (see paragraph 21 below). The Court of Appeal held that in a situation where the state of O.T.’s health and adherence to the treatment had not improved and the discontinuation of his inpatient treatment or its replacement with outpatient treatment was in the doctors’ opinion excluded, ordering another expert examination would have been irrelevant.
On 19 July 2013 the applicant lodged a further appeal with the Supreme Court, reiterating the complaints made in her first appeal. She also requested legal aid, since an appeal before the Supreme Court could be lodged only by a lawyer, for the hiring of whom she had no financial means.
By a decision of 16 September 2013 the Supreme Court refused the applicant’s request for legal aid. The Supreme Court noted that although the applicant had asked for legal aid for herself and not for O.T., she had justified her request by arguing that there was a need to protect O.T.’s rights – primarily his right to liberty. The Supreme Court went on to add that the applicant did not herself have rights in the proceedings in question that she could protect by means of securing legal aid and that there was therefore no need to recognise her right of appeal. The Supreme Court noted that the legal aid lawyer appointed for O.T. by a decision of the Tartu County Court of 30 April 2013 (see paragraph 12 above) could have lodged an appeal in his client’s interests.
On 18 September 2017 the Government notified the Court that the psychiatric treatment of the applicant’s son had been terminated, at the request of the applicant, by a decision of the Tartu County Court of 21 September 2016.
Article 86 § 3 of the Penal Code provides that coercive psychiatric treatment shall be applied until the person in question recovers or ceases to pose a danger. The termination of such treatment must be ordered by a court.
The CCrP provides in the relevant parts as follows:
“(1)  Taking into consideration the opinion of a psychiatrist or medical committee that has examined the person subjected to coercive treatment, coercive inpatient treatment may be replaced by outpatient treatment ..., if such a request is submitted by a person close to the person being treated ..., a statutory representative, a health-care provider or the counsel of that person ...
...
(3)  Any alteration of the administration of coercive psychiatric treatment shall be decided by a ruling of a court in the locality of the health-care provider [in question], in the presence of a prosecutor and counsel. If coercive inpatient treatment is replaced by coercive outpatient treatment, the person subjected to treatment and his or her guardian shall also be summoned to the hearing, but their failure to appear shall not hinder the hearing of the matter. If necessary, the court may involve other persons or order an expert assessment upon deciding on the alteration of the administration of coercive psychiatric treatment.”
“(1)  If a person recovers as a result of coercive psychiatric treatment administered to him or her – or, in the opinion of a psychiatrist or a medical committee that has examined the person subjected to coercive treatment, there is no need for the further administration of coercive treatment – then a court shall terminate the administration of coercive psychiatric treatment upon the recommendation of the health-care provider [in question].
...
(4)  Taking into consideration the opinion of a psychiatrist or medical committee who has examined the person subjected to treatment, a court may terminate the administration of coercive treatment upon a request submitted by a person close to the person being treated ..., [or by] his or her statutory representative or counsel.
(5)  The termination of the administration of coercive psychiatric treatment shall be decided on by a ruling of a court in the locality of the health-care provider [in question], in the presence of a prosecutor and counsel. The person subject to treatment and his or her guardian shall also be summoned to the court hearing, but their failure to appear shall not hinder the hearing of the matter. If necessary, the court may involve other persons or order an expert assessment upon deciding on the termination of the administration of coercive psychiatric treatment.”
Regulation No. 35 of 26 August 2011 of the Minister of Social Affairs “Requirements for providers of coercive psychiatric treatment, requirements for coercive psychiatric treatment, and the organisation of the work of health-care providers upon the implementation of coercive psychiatric treatment ordered by a court” (Psühhiaatrilise sundravi osutajale esitatavad nõuded, psühhiaatrilise sundravi nõuded ja tervishoiuteenuse osutaja töökorraldus kohtu poolt määratud psühhiaatrilise sundravi kohaldamisel)) provides that patients in inpatient psychiatric treatment must undergo a medical examination by a committee every six months. Patients in outpatient psychiatric treatment must undergo such an examination at least once a year (section 3(6)). The medical committee conducting such an examination must comprise at least two psychiatrists. In the course of the examination the medical committee decides whether inpatient coercive treatment is to be replaced with outpatient treatment, whether outpatient coercive treatment is to be replaced with inpatient treatment, or whether the coercive treatment of the patient needs to be continued, taking into account his or her state of mind and the danger to society that he or she poses (section 3(7)).
According to the explanatory annex to the legislation amending the CCrP (no. 599 SE) by which, inter alia, the provisions concerning coercive psychiatric treatment were revised, a person subjected to coercive psychiatric treatment was not listed in Article 402-1 § 1 as someone having the right to initiate the replacement of such treatment, as such a person would presumably be in a state of mental incapacity. The amended version of Article 402-1 § 1 entered into force on 1 September 2011 (see paragraph 21 above).
On the basis of the requirement to be represented by counsel (Article 402-1 § 3 and Article 403 § 5 of the CCrP), a person who is under coercive psychiatric treatment has the right to legal aid assistance in proceedings for the termination or replacement of that treatment. In cases nos.1-2-9055 and 110-8154 of 2 January 2014 and 9 October 2014, respectively, the Tartu County Court considered that a personal request by a patient regarding his treatment constituted an application for legal aid (the legal aid lawyer would then take over the patient’s claim).
In a judgment of 5 June 2017 in case no. 3-1-1-62-16 the Supreme Court assessed the constitutionality of Article 403 § 4 of the CCrP. Referring, inter alia, to Article 5 § 4 of the Convention, the Supreme Court stated that the provision in question had to be construed in such a way that an application lodged by a patient himself or herself for the termination of his or her treatment must be seen as a request for legal aid and that such aid must then be granted. The legal aid lawyer can then supplement or elaborate on the patient’s original application, but this is not decisive for the initiation of the procedure. Against this background the Supreme Court found that persons under coercive treatment have an effective remedy in seeking the termination of that treatment. The court furthermore underlined that courts deciding on such requests can either rely on medical opinions provided by psychiatrists sitting on a medical committee or they can order a separate forensic medical expert opinion.
The European Committee for the Prevention of Torture and Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment (“the CPT”) visited Estonia between 9 and 18 May 2007. Among the institutions visited was the Viljandi Hospital Foundation (Sihtasutus Viljandi Haigla), which admits patients in respect of whom coercive psychiatric treatment has been ordered by a court under section 86 of the Penal Code.
In paragraph 123 of its report CPT/Inf (2011) 15, the CPT made the following remark:
In the specific context of coercive psychiatric treatment (referred to as “forensic psychiatry” in the report), the CPT noted: