The application concerns the applicants’ arrest at a political rally at Bolotnaya Square on 6 May 2012, followed by their overnight detention at a police station and their administrative conviction for disobeying lawful orders of the police. During the arrest of the first applicant, a police officer allegedly applied excessive physical force.
The first applicant (Mr Navalnyy) was born in 1976. The second applicant (Mr Gunko) was born in 1960. They both live in Moscow. The applicants were represented by Mr K. Terekhov, a lawyer practising in Moscow.
The Russian Government (“the Government”) were represented initially by Mr G. Matyushkin, Representative of the Russian Federation to the European Court of Human Rights, and then by his successor in that office, Mr M. Galperin.
The facts of the case, as submitted by the parties, may be summarised as follows.
The background facts relating to the planning, conduct and dispersal of the demonstration at Bolotnaya Square are set out in more detail in Frumkin v. Russia (no. 74568/12, §§ 7-65, 5 January 2016); Yaroslav Belousov v. Russia (nos. 2653/13 and 60980/14, §§ 7-33, 4 October 2016); and Razvozzhayev v. Russia and Ukraine and Udaltsov v. Russia (nos. 75734/12 and 2 others, §§ 8-31, 19 November 2019). The parties’ submissions on the circumstances directly relevant to the present case are set out below.
On 6 May 2012 a public demonstration entitled the “March of Millions” was held in central Moscow to protest against the allegedly rigged presidential elections. The event had been approved by the city authorities in the form of a march followed by a meeting at Bolotnaya Square which was supposed to end at 7.30 p.m. The march was peaceful and took place without any disruptions, but when the marchers arrived at Bolotnaya Square it became apparent that barriers installed by the police had narrowed the entrance to the meeting venue, allegedly restricting the space allocated for the meeting. To control the crowd, a police cordon forced the protesters to remain within the barriers. There were numerous clashes between the police and protesters. At 5.30 p.m. the police ordered that the meeting finish early and began to disperse the participants. It took them about two hours to clear the protesters from the square.
The applicants took part in the demonstration on 6 May 2012 at Bolotnaya Square. They were arrested at the venue of the event and taken to police stations, where they were charged with an administrative offence. After an overnight detention the applicants were brought before justices of the peace and convicted as charged.
The first applicant was one of the leaders who began a sit-in during the demonstration (for a detailed account see Razvozzhayev and Udaltsov, cited above, §§ 18-31). According to him, he was arrested soon after 6 p.m. on his way to the stage as he intended to address the meeting with a speech. The first applicant alleged that before his arrest he had not received any warning or orders from the police. During the arrest a police officer forced his arm behind his back, causing pain and pushing him to bend forwards, although the first applicant did not resist the arrest. The police officer pushed the first applicant all the way to the police station while twisting his arm and forcing him to bend forwards. The first applicant provided a videorecording and a link to a YouTube video showing his arrest. The Government in their observations confirmed that the domestic courts had seen the same video.
The YouTube video contains the following scenes, in so far as the events complained of are concerned.
(i)  The first applicant walks towards the stage at Bolotnaya Square while the protesters are shouting “We shall not leave!” When he approaches the stage he sees a group of police officers taking someone from the stage. The first applicant is taking hold of a megaphone when two police officers approach him. The first applicant is heard saying: “Where are you taking me? I have not done anything yet.” He tries to get on the stage and at that moment several police officers pull him back and take him away. After that he shouts several times: “Do not leave! Everyone, stay here!”
(ii)  After being apprehended, the first applicant is taken from the area adjacent to the stage to a police station. In the next shot the first applicant is carried out from that area by several police officers. One of the police officers asks the first applicant whether he will continue walking by himself and as the answer is positive, the first applicant is put on his feet and is led to walk halfbent with two police officers twisting his arms behind his back. A few seconds later, one of the police officers says: “Brother, stay still, or I will break your arm.” To that the first applicant replies: “I will put you in jail then” and turns left to look at the police officer. After that the police officer twists the first applicant’s left arm with such force as to make him scream: “You are breaking it!” The first applicant continues to walk in the same position and a few seconds later he screams again as his arm is suddenly forced up. Then he asks the police officer to ease the pressure on his arm a bit. Just before they enter the police station, the police officer tells the first applicant to bend lower. From the moment when the first applicant is put on the ground and starts walking himself until his entry into the police station, no other responses by the police officers or visible resistance by the first applicant can be heard or seen in the video-recording. The videorecording ends when the first applicant is taken inside the 1st Functional Battalion of the traffic police on the special highway (“1 Специализированный Батальон ДПС ГИБДД на спецтрассе”).
At 6.40 p.m. the first applicant was taken to Yakimanka district police station in Moscow, where an on-duty officer drew up a record of his transfer for the purpose of compiling an administrative file and ordered his administrative detention.
At the police station an on-duty officer also drew up an administrative-offence record on the basis of statements of two police officers, D.S. and V.S., who had allegedly arrested the first applicant. He was charged with having disobeyed a lawful order of the police, an offence under Article 19.3 § 1 of the Code of Administrative Offences. An attachment was enclosed with the administrative-offence record. It stated that on 6 May 2012 at 6.30 p.m. the first applicant, “acting as a participant in the public assembly – the meeting at Bolotnaya Square ... with approximately 8,000 participants ... – called on the protesters to disobey the authorities, not to leave the venue after the assembly and to ignore the orders of the police. The police officers D.S. and V.S. approached [the first applicant], introduced themselves and requested that he stop his actions. [The first applicant] refused in reply and continued attracting the attention of the public and the media. In response to the officers’ lawful request to follow them to the police van to draw up an administrative-offence record [the first applicant] shouted ‘Russia without Putin!’ ... [and] pushed them away”. The first applicant was detained pending the examination of the administrative case.
On 7 May 2012 at 3 p.m. the first applicant was brought before the Justice of the Peace of circuit no. 100 of the Yakimanka District. The Justice of the Peace examined the video-recording submitted by the first applicant and found that despite having been prohibited from doing so by the police, the first applicant had attempted to go up on the stage, and that by doing so and by shouting to the participants not to leave the venue, he had resisted the police. Referring to the records of the administrative offence, transfer and detention, as well as the reports and written explanations submitted by the police officers D.S. and V.S., the Justice of the Peace established that the applicant had disobeyed a lawful order of the police, in breach of Article 19.3 § 1 of the Code of Administrative Offences. The first applicant was sentenced to a fine of 1,000 Russian roubles (RUB, equivalent to about 20 euros at the material time).
The first applicant appealed, arguing, inter alia, that the administrative-offence record and the reports submitted by D.S. and V.S. had been false, and that the police had not given any orders before apprehending him. The first applicant further argued that the conclusions drawn by the court contradicted the available evidence, in particular the video-recording.
In the appeal proceedings the first applicant’s lawyer requested that D.S. and V.S. be questioned. He disputed that those particular police officers had arrested the first applicant. He explained that the videorecording of the first applicant’s arrest also showed that Mr Udaltsov had been escorted to the police station approximately thirty seconds before Mr Navalnyy’s arrest. According to the administrative file on Mr Udaltsov’s case, he had been arrested by the same officers, D.S. and V.S. The representative argued that it was practically impossible that the same police officers who had arrested Mr Udaltsov had returned to the stage to arrest the first applicant.
On 19 July 2012 the Zamoskvoretskiy District Court by a separate ruling dismissed the applicant’s request to question the police officers, finding that the video-recording of the arrest did not contain the date and time when it had been made, and that the faces of the police officers who had arrested the man referred to as Mr Udaltsov could not be seen.
On 19 July 2012 the Zamoskvoretskiy District Court upheld the firstinstance judgment. In respect of the video-recording, the court held that it could not attest to a lack of an offence in the acts of the first applicant on 6 May 2012 as the recording contained no indication of the date and the place when and where it had been made. At the same time, the court noted that the Justice of the Peace had examined the recording and had made an assessment of it in the first-instance judgment.
On 17 May 2012 the first applicant complained to the investigating authorities that, inter alia, during his arrest on 6 May 2012 an unidentified police officer had used excessive force by twisting his arm, causing him severe physical pain. The first applicant submitted that, as a result of that treatment, he had suffered abrasions on his body. He provided a videorecording showing the manner in which force had been applied in respect of him.
On 24 May 2012 the first applicant received a reply stating that, in so far as the alleged ill-treatment was concerned, a copy of his complaint had been forwarded to the Internal Affairs Unit of the relevant Department of the Interior for an internal check.
On 27 June 2012 the first applicant lodged a complaint in accordance with Article 125 of the Code of Criminal Procedure as regards the above-mentioned reply.
On 19 September 2012 the Zamoskvoretskiy District Court terminated the proceedings, having established that the first applicant’s request to investigate the alleged ill-treatment had been registered by the investigation authorities, and a pre-investigation check had been initiated.
On 20 September 2012 the investigator refused to open a criminal case in respect of the applicant’s allegation of ill-treatment.
On 20 March 2013, in another procedure, the investigator decided not to instigate criminal proceedings following several complaints by participants in the public assembly of 6 May 2012, including the first applicant. The investigator concluded that during the event the police had acted lawfully and that physical force had been legitimately used in respect of those protesters who had demonstrated resistance while being arrested. The decision did not address the first applicant’s specific case and the allegations that his arrest and the acts of the police in respect of him had been unlawful.
On 25 November 2014 the Zamoskvoretskiy District Court dismissed the applicant’s complaint in accordance with Article 125 of the Code of Criminal Procedure in respect of the refusal of 20 September 2012.
On 16 February 2015 the Moscow City Court upheld on appeal the decision of the District Court.
The second applicant was arrested at about 7 p.m. because, according to the police, he was obstructing the traffic. However, the second applicant asserted that the venue had been cordoned off by the police and that there had been no traffic.
At 8.45 p.m. the second applicant was transferred to Zamoskvorechye District police station in Moscow, where an on-duty officer drew up a record of the administrative transfer for the purpose of compiling an administrative-offence record and ordered his administrative detention.
On the same day, an administrative-offence record was drawn up on the basis of statements by two police officers who had allegedly arrested the second applicant. He was charged with having disobeyed a lawful order of the police, an offence under Article 19.3 of the Code of Administrative Offences.
On 7 May 2012 at 3 p.m. the second applicant was brought before the Justice of the Peace of circuit no. 396 of the Yakimanka District. The judge examined the charges. The second applicant submitted that he had participated in the authorised public assembly and had intended to go home after it had ended, but he had not managed to leave because of the large numbers of people present and the fact that the area had been cordoned off. On the basis of the records of the administrative offence, transfer and detention, as well as the reports and explanations submitted by the police officers, the second applicant was found to have attempted to break through the cordon, acted aggressively, shouted slogans, and attempted to enter the traffic area, thereby obstructing the traffic. The second applicant, according to the judge, had disobeyed the lawful order of the police to stop those acts. He was found guilty under Article 19.3 § 1 of the Code of Administrative Offences, and was sentenced to twenty-four hours’ administrative imprisonment, with effect from 8.45 p.m. on 6 May 2012.
The second applicant appealed, arguing that his conviction was unlawful. In particular, he maintained that the police had not made any orders in respect of him, nor had he shown any resistance prior to the arrest. He also alleged that the police officer who had arrested him had not introduced himself, and that the police officers’ reports had been drawn up using a template without an individual description of his offence.
On 17 May 2012 the Zamoskvoretskiy District Court examined the second applicant’s appeal and upheld the first-instance judgment.
For a summary of the relevant domestic law, see Frumkin, cited above, §§ 77-79.