The case originated in an application (no. 46336/99) against the Republic of Bulgaria lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by Mr Kiril Kostadinov Ivanov, Mr Vladimir Ivanov Kotzelov, Mr Dimcho Dimitrov Hristov and Mr Angel Georgiev Sharov, Bulgarian nationals who were born in 1942, 1939, 1955 and 1934 respectively and live(d) in Blagoevgrad (“the applicants”), on 15 January 1999.
The applicants were represented before the Court by Mr Y. Grozev and Ms V. Terzieva, lawyers practising in . The Bulgarian Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Ms M. Kotzeva, of the Ministry of Justice.
The applicants alleged that the bans on two rallies they had intended to organise in  on 10 August and 12 September 1998 had not been imposed in accordance with the law and had not been necessary in a democratic society. The applicants further alleged that the courts had improperly refused to examine the appeal against the second ban and thus denied them an effective remedy in that respect.
The application was allocated to the First Section of the Court (Rule 52 § 1 of the Rules of Court). Within that Section, the Chamber that would consider the case (Article 27 § 1 of the Convention) was constituted as provided in Rule 26 § 1.
By a decision of 9 September 2004 the Court (First Section) decided to join to the merits the Government’s objection of nonexhaustion of domestic remedies in respect of the applicants’ complaint about the bans on the rallies, and declared the application admissible.
Neither the applicants, nor the Government filed observations on the merits.
On 1 November 2004 the Court changed the composition of its Sections (Rule 25 § 1). This case was assigned to the newly composed First Section (Rule 52 § 1).
In a letter of 16 November 2004 the applicants’ representative informed the Court that the third applicant, Mr Dimcho Dimitrov Hristov, had died on an unspecified date after the introduction of the application. The Court has not been informed of the wish of any heir or nextofkin of Mr Hristov to continue the proceedings on his behalf.
The applicants describe themselves as being of Macedonian ethnicity and are members of the United Macedonian Organisation Ilinden – PIRIN (“UMO Ilinden – PIRIN”).
UMO Ilinden – PIRIN apparently has close links with the United Macedonian Organisation Ilinden, an association based in southwest Bulgaria (in an area known as the Pirin region or the geographic region of Pirin Macedonia), that makes yearly attempts to organise commemorative events on various sites in Pirin Macedonia. During the period 19942003 these rallies were, with minor exceptions, systematically banned by the authorities (see Stankov and the United Macedonian Organisation Ilinden v. Bulgaria, nos. 29221/95 and 29225/95, ECHR 2001IX, and The United Macedonian Organisation Ilinden and Ivanov v. Bulgaria, no. 44079/98, 20 October 2005). Also, this association was refused registration in 199091 and again in 199899 (see The United Macedonian Organisation Ilinden and Others v. Bulgaria (dec.), no. 59491/00, 9 September 2004).
On 29 February 2000 UMO Ilinden – PIRIN, which had in the meantime obtained registration as a political party, was declared unconstitutional by the Constitutional Court, and as a result dissolved (see The United Macedonian Organisation Ilinden – PIRIN and Others v. Bulgaria, no. 59489/00, 20 October 2005).
On 3 August 1998 the second applicant, acting on behalf of the members and the followers of UMO Ilinden – PIRIN, informed the mayor of  that a rally had been planned for 10 August 1998 – the anniversary of the 1913 Bucharest Treaty – in the public garden in front of the National Theatre. Approximately one hundred people were expected to turn up. The applicant assured the mayor that no disturbances would occur during the event.
The same day, 3 August 1998, the mayor of  issued an order prohibiting the rally pursuant to section 12(2)(2) of the Meetings and Marches Act. He opined, without giving further reasons, that the event would “create conditions for breaches of the public order”. A copy of the order was sent to the  police authorities for enforcement.
Apparently no appeal was made against the order.
On 1 September 1998 the first applicant, acting on behalf of the members and the followers of UMO Ilinden – PIRIN, informed the mayor of  that a rally had been planned for 12 September 1998 between 12 noon and 2 p.m. in front of the National Theatre. He stated that the event would be in commemoration of the “[d]ay of the genocide against the Macedonians”. Approximately one hundred and twenty persons were expected to take part. The applicant assured the mayor that the event would be entirely peaceful and that no disturbances would occur.
The next day, 2 September 1998, the mayor issued an order banning the rally pursuant to section 12(2)(2) of the Meetings and Marches Act. The order stated that the event would “create conditions for breaches of the public order”, without giving further reasons. A copy of the order was sent to the  police authorities for enforcement.
The same day the first applicant lodged an appeal against the order with the Sofia District Court. He argued that the order was not reasoned and that there were no grounds to anticipate that the planned rally would pose a threat to public order. If the local authorities were allowed to prohibit public events without specifying the reasons for doing so, that would render nugatory the legal guarantees of freedom of assembly.
On 8 September 1998 the Sofia District Court ruled in private that it had no jurisdiction to examine the appeal. It held that the mayor’s order had to be appealed first before the Executive Committee of the People’s Council, as provided in section 12(4) of the Meetings and Marches Act. The person concerned could resort to the court only if such an appeal was unsuccessful. Accordingly, the court discontinued the judicial proceedings and sent the appeal to the Executive Committee of the People’s Council. The ruling was apparently not notified to the first applicant.
Since on 12 September 1998 the mayoral ban had not been overturned, the applicants informed the members and followers of UMO Ilinden – PIRIN that the rally would not take place.
On 17 September 1998 the first applicant, who had in the meantime apparently learned about the Sofia District Court’s ruling of 8 September 1998 (see paragraph 18 above), appealed against it to the Sofia City Court. He argued that the court had erred in referring the appeal to the Executive Committee of the People’s Council. This body was mentioned in the Meetings and Marches Act, which had been enacted prior to the Constitution of 1991, when the municipal authorities had been structured differently. Under the Constitution of 1991 the Executive Committee, which had been part of the executive branch of the local authorities, had ceased to exist. It was erroneous to hold that the Municipal Council – the municipal legislative body – was the successor to the Executive Committee, and as such competent to examine appeals against orders of the mayor. Moreover, the Municipal Council convened at long intervals, which had prevented it from examining the appeal in time for the planned rally.
The Sofia City Court dismissed the appeal in a decision of 19 March 2002. It held that, by section 12(4) of the Meetings and Marches Act, the organiser of a rally could appeal against the mayoral ban to the Municipal Council, which had to rule on the appeal within twentyfour hours. Only if the Municipal Council dismissed the appeal the dispute could be brought before the court. By section 35(2) of the Administrative Procedure Act, judicial review of administrative acts was only possible if the administrative remedies had been exhausted, or the timelimit for doing so had expired. In the case at hand no administrative appeal had been lodged, whereas the appeal to the Sofia District Court had been lodged on 2 September 1998, i.e. before the expiry of the twentyfour hours’ timelimit laid down in section 12(4) of the Meetings and Marches Act. The court went on to state that the argument that the Municipal Council convened at long intervals and was hence not in a position to examine the appeal in time was unavailing, because, on the one hand, an infelicitous legal rule still had to be complied with, and on the other, if the administrative body failed to rule on the appeal within twentyfour hours, the planned event could take place, as provided by section 12(5) of the Meetings and Marches Act. Furthermore, it could not be said that the Municipal Council did not have the power to rule an appeal against the mayoral ban, because by the terms of section 21(2) of the Local SelfGovernment and Local Administration Act it could decide on all questions of importance for the local community.
The first applicant appealed to the Supreme Court of Cassation, reiterating his arguments.
The Supreme Court of Cassation dismissed the appeal in a final decision of 11 March 2003. It held that the Sofia City Court’s disposition of the case had been correct, although it did not support the reasoning given by that court. By the time the Sofia City Court had decided the case – more than three and a half years after the date of the planned event – the first applicant had no longer had any interest in appealing against the ban. Moreover, such an interest had been lacking even at the time of the lodging of the appeal against the Sofia District Court’s ruling.
The relevant provisions of the Constitution of 1991 read as follows:
Article 43
“1.  Everyone shall have the right to peaceful and unarmed assembly at meetings and marches.
The procedure for organising and holding meetings and marches shall be provided for by Act of Parliament.
Permission shall not be required for meetings to be held indoors.”
Article 44 § 2
“Organisations whose activities are directed against the sovereignty or the territorial integrity of the country or against the unity of the nation, or aim at stirring racial, national, ethnic or religious hatred, or at violating the rights and freedoms of others, as well as organisations creating secret or paramilitary structures, or which seek to achieve their aims through violence, shall be prohibited.”
The legal requirements for the organisation of meetings are laid down in the Meetings and Marches Act of 1990 („Закон за събранията, митингите и манифестациите“). Its relevant provisions are as follows:
Section 2
“Meetings, rallies and marches may be organised by individuals, associations, political or other civic organisations.”
Section 8(1)
“Where a meeting or rally is to be held outdoors, the organisers shall notify the [respective] People’s Council or mayor’s office in writing at least fortyeight hours before its beginning and shall indicate the [name of] the organiser, the aim [of the meeting or rally], and its venue and time.”
The prohibitions against meetings are also set out in the Meetings and Marches Act:
Section 12
“1.  Where the time or venue of the meeting or rally or the itinerary of the march would create a situation endangering public order or traffic safety, the President of the Executive Committee of the People’s Council, or the mayor, respectively, shall propose their modification.
The President of the Executive Committee of the People’s Council or the mayor shall be competent to prohibit the holding of a meeting, rally or march, where reliable information exists that:
it aims at the violent overturning of Constitutional public order or is directed against the territorial integrity of the country;
it would endanger public order in the local community;
...
it would breach the rights and freedoms of others.
The prohibition shall be imposed by a written reasoned act not later than twentyfour hours after the notification.
The organiser of the meeting, rally or march may appeal to the Executive Committee of the People’s Council against the prohibition referred to in the preceding paragraph. The Executive Committee shall decide within twentyfour hours.
Where the Executive Committee of the People’s Council has not decided within [the above] time-limit, the march, rally or meeting may proceed.
If the appeal is dismissed, the dispute shall be referred to the respective district court which shall decide within five days. That court’s decision shall be final.”
The Meetings and Marches Act was enacted in 1990, when the Constitution of 1971 was still in force. Under the Constitution of 1971 the executive local state organs were the Executive Committees of the district People’s Councils. The mayors, referred to in some of the provisions of the Meetings and Marches Act, were representatives of the Executive Committee acting in villages and towns which were under the jurisdiction of the respective People’s Council.
The Constitution of 1991 abolished the Executive Committees and established the post of mayor, elected by direct universal suffrage, as the “organ of the executive power in the municipality” (Article 139 § 1).
The general rules of procedure for administrative appeals and judicial review of administrative acts are set out in the Administrative Procedure Act of 1979 („Закон за административното производство“). Section 19(1) of that Act provides that administrative acts may be appealed hierarchically before the higher administrative body or official. The appeal must be examined by the administrative body or the official which is immediately superior to the body or the official which has issued the act (section 27(1)). The acts of the mayors may be appealed before the regional governors (section 27(3)). Administrative acts may also be appealed before the competent courts (section 33(1)). The appeal must be lodged after the administrative remedies have been exhausted or the timelimit for doing so has expired (section 35(2)).
Section 21(1) of the Local SelfGovernment and Local Administration Act of 1991 („Закон за местното самоуправление и местната администрация“) contains a list of the powers of the Municipal Council. No mention is made therein of a power to examine appeals against acts of the mayor. Section 21(2) provides that the Municipal Council is generally competent to decide on matters of importance for the local community which do not fall within the competence of other bodies.