The case concerns police ill-treatment of the applicants during a political rally on 6 May 2012 at Bolotnaya Square. The applicants were neither convicted of mass disorder nor accused of any other offence in connection with the relevant events at Bolotnaya Square.
The first applicant (Mr Zakharov) was born in 1966. The second applicant (Ms Varzhabetyan) was born in 1945. They both live in Moscow. The applicants were represented by Mr S.A. Minenkov and Mr A.N. Laptev respectively, lawyers practising in Moscow.
The Government were represented initially by Mr G. Matyushkin, the Representative of the Russian Federation to the European Court of Human Rights, and then by his successor in that office, Mr M. Galperin.
The background facts relating to the planning, conduct and dispersal of the assembly at Bolotnaya Square are set out in more detail in the judgment of Frumkin v. Russia (no. 74568/12, §§ 7-65, 5 January 2016). The parties’ submissions directly relevant to the present case may be summarised as follows.
Both applicants participated in the political rally on 6 May 2012. The first applicant was one of the organisers of the event. According to them, they neither violated public order nor resisted the police who were present at the assembly. However, during the dispersal of the meeting the police allegedly hit each of the applicants on the head with a rubber truncheon.
The first applicant submitted photographs. One of the photographs shows some police officers aiming blows at the crowd with their rubber truncheons. The first applicant can be seen in that crowd. Another photograph shows the first applicant being pulled by two police officers. These photographs do not show the actual moment when the first applicant was allegedly attacked with a rubber truncheon. However, two other photographs show the applicant at the site of the events, with his face bleeding. According to the first applicant, having received a blow to the head, he lost consciousness. Other participants in the rally helped him obtain first aid treatment. Later on, the first applicant was taken to a hospital, and he was discharged from that hospital on the same day. He submitted a medical certificate of 6 May 2012 stating that he had been diagnosed with a contused wound of the frontal lobe.
The second applicant provided links to YouTube videos showing the clashes between the police and the protesters. The videos indicate that the second applicant was surrounded by police officers when she fell and started screaming. The videos also show other participants in the assembly carrying the second applicant and shouting at the police officers, accusing them of hitting an elderly woman, referring to the second applicant.
The second applicant also submitted a medical certificate stating that on 6 May 2012 an ambulance had been called for her to Bolotnaya Square. The certificate attested that she had sustained a head injury, and had had soft tissue bruises on the right side of her head and in the perineal region. Medical certificates of 7 May and 8 June 2012 stated that the applicant had had health problems as a result of the trauma she had experienced on 6 May 2012.
Neither of the applicants was arrested or charged with any offence in connection with the events of 6 May 2012.
On 23 June 2012 the first applicant asked the Investigation Committee to institute criminal proceedings on account of his alleged illtreatment during the dispersal of the public assembly. He enclosed the photographs and the medical certificate (see paragraph 6 above) with his application. The applicant’s request was joined to other requests concerning the alleged abuse of powers by the police officers on 6 May 2012.
On 20 March 2013 the Zamoskvoretskiy branch of the Investigation Committee dismissed several individual complaints and two official enquiries concerning the allegedly unlawful acts of the police in dispersing the rally on 6 May 2012, including the excessive use of force and arbitrary arrests. In his decision, the investigator referred to, inter alia, the first applicant’s description of the incident and statements by other persons, including some of the police officers. He further noted that according to an internal inquiry which had been conducted in the aftermath of the events at Bolotnaya Square, a police officer had called the first applicant, inviting him to come to the police station to give further information and identify the police officer responsible for the attack. The report on the above-mentioned inquiry was dated 8 June 2012 and stated that the applicant had refused to attend the meeting, stating that he could not identify the police officer concerned.
In the same decision, the investigator found that on 6 May 2012, in response to the breaking of a police cordon by some protesters, the police had started arresting persons who had been most actively involved in those acts. The investigator further concluded that the work of the officers who had been in charge of apprehending offenders had involved the use of force and special means of restraint, in so far as necessary, against persons who had been putting up resistance (see Frumkin, cited above, § 52). It was found that there were no elements of a crime in the acts of the police officers.
The investigator did not examine the incident in respect of the first applicant, and his decision did not indicate that the first applicant had acted aggressively towards the police or shown any disobedience. The investigator’s decision confirmed that the applicant was not listed among the persons who had been apprehended that day.
The first applicant complained about the decision of 20 March 2013 to the prosecutor’s office and challenged it before the courts. He argued, in particular, that the investigator had not addressed his allegations and had made no attempt to identify the police officer concerned. The applicant claimed that by joining his application to those of others, the investigator had avoided assessing the particular incident of which he had complained. He also disputed what had allegedly been said during the telephone call in June 2012 (see paragraph 11 above).
On 17 May 2013 the applicant was sent a reply from the prosecutor’s office which briefly stated that there were no grounds for setting aside the decision not to open a criminal case.
On 16 August 2013 the Zamoskvoretskiy District Court of Moscow (“the District Court”) dismissed the applicant’s complaint in respect of the decision of 20 March 2013 not to open a criminal case. The court considered that the investigator had made a thorough evaluation of the acts of the police that had safeguarded public order during the mass event. The judge further noted that the fact that the applicant had been admitted to hospital on 6 May 2012 had been reported on the same day and had triggered an internal inquiry. The allegations regarding unlawful acts by the police in respect of the applicant had not been confirmed during that inquiry.
On 20 August 2013 the District Court dismissed a judicial complaint by the applicant concerning the prosecutor’s reply of 17 May 2013. The court considered that the applicant’s constitutional rights had not been violated, as he had had the opportunity to lodge a judicial complaint in respect of the decision of 20 March 2013.
The applicant appealed against the decision of 16 August 2013, arguing, in particular, that the investigator had not provided a thorough assessment of his arguments, and that the investigator’s conclusions were not based on the material of the pre-investigation inquiry.
On 1 November 2013 the Moscow City Court upheld the decision of 16 August 2013. In reply to the arguments raised by the applicant, the court stated that, at the pre-trial stage, a court had no jurisdiction to rule on the credibility of information which an investigator had to check in accordance with Article 144 of the Code of Criminal Procedure.
On 11 November 2013 the Moscow City Court upheld the decision of 20 August 2013.
On 29 October 2012 the second applicant asked for criminal proceedings to be instigated on account of her alleged ill-treatment by the police officers. As in the first applicant’s case, her request was joined to other requests concerning the alleged abuse of powers by the police officers on 6 May 2012.
On 7 December 2012, 25 October 2013, 22 May 2014 and 21 January 2016 the investigator refused to open a criminal investigation, on the grounds that the acts of the police did not constitute a criminal offence. In his decisions, the investigator set out the second applicant’s arguments concerning the incident and, without analysing the particular circumstances of her case, came to literally the same conclusions as those made in the first applicant’s case (see paragraph 12 above).
The decisions mentioned in the paragraph above were overruled by the prosecutor as premature and ill-founded on 23 October 2013, 25 April 2014, 27 November 2015 and 2 November 2016 respectively. Each time, the material in the case file was subjected to a further inquiry. On the last occasion the prosecutor noted in particular that during the next additional inquiry the investigator had to examine the DVD that the applicant had previously submitted. According to the second applicant, she was informed about the decisions not to open a criminal investigation following substantial delays; as regards the prosecutor’s decisions, on at least two occasions she learnt about those decisions during court proceedings, after she had challenged the decisions (see paragraph 24 below).
On an unspecified date in 2013, and on 23 September 2015 and 23 September 2016 the second applicant challenged the decisions not to open a criminal investigation before the courts. On 25 October 2013 the District Court dismissed the applicant’s claim, finding that the decision not to institute a criminal investigation dated 7 December 2012 was lawful. On 30 November 2015 and 10 November 2016 the District Court dismissed the applicant’s claims, as the investigator’s decisions of 22 May 2014 and 21 January 2016 had been overruled by the prosecutor before the court hearings had taken place (see paragraph 23 above). It does not follow from the materials available before the Court that the second applicant appealed against these decisions of the District Court.
On 21 June 2016 the second applicant claimed compensation for non-pecuniary damage allegedly caused by the investigating bodies that had dealt with her application and refused to institute a criminal investigation. She argued that considering her request jointly with those of others had been unlawful, and that the numerous remittals of the case for further inquiries revealed the deficiency of the work of the investigators. She further claimed that the failure to take the necessary measures to establish the circumstances of the incident had violated her rights and caused her psychological and physical suffering.
On 28 November 2016 the Basmannyy District Court of Moscow rejected the applicant’s claim. The court found that the alleged defects in the work of the investigators had been remedied by the overruling of their decisions. The court further found that the applicant had provided no evidence indicating that the defendants’ acts had caused her any suffering and that they were at fault for the alleged negative consequences.
On 30 March 2017 the Moscow City Court upheld the decision on appeal.
On 10 October 2017 a judge of the Moscow City Court dismissed a cassation appeal by the applicant.
For a summary of the relevant domestic law provisions governing pre-investigation inquiries and judicial review of the decisions of investigating authorities not to open a criminal case, see Lyapin v. Russia (no. 46956/09, §§ 99-100, 24 July 2014).
Section 20 of the Police Act (no. 3 of 7 February 2011, as in force at the material time) provided that police officers might use physical force, including combat methods, to prevent criminal and administrative offences, to arrest individuals who had committed such offences, and to overcome resistance to lawful orders if non-violent methods did not ensure compliance with responsibilities entrusted to the police.
Section 21 of the Police Act laid down an exhaustive list of circumstances in which special means, including rubber truncheons, might be used. In particular, rubber truncheons might be used to repel an attack on civilians or police officers, to overcome resistance shown to a police officer, and to repress mass disorder and put an end to collective actions disrupting the operation of transport, means of communication and legal entities. The law prohibited, inter alia, hitting a person on the head with a rubber truncheon. Section 22 of the Police Act further stated that the use of special means to suppress an unlawful, but peaceful manifestation that did not disrupt the operation of transport, means of communication and legal entities was prohibited.
For relevant international material on freedom of peaceful assembly, including guidelines on policing public assemblies see Frumkin (cited above, § 80).