The case concerns the applicants’ criminal conviction for participating in mass disorder and violence against the police during the suppression of a public assembly at Bolotnaya Square in Moscow on 6 May 2012.
The first applicant (Mr Gushchin) was born in 1988 and lives in Khimki in the Moscow Region. The second applicant (Mr Gaskarov) was born in 1985 and lives in Zhukovskiy, also in the Moscow Region. The applicants were represented by Mr Rachkovskiy, a lawyer practising in Moscow, and Ms N. Dobreva, a lawyer practising in Sofia.
The Government were represented initially by Mr G. Matyushkin, Representative of the Russian Federation to the European Court of Human Rights, and then by his successor in that office, Mr M. Galperin.
The facts of the case, as submitted by the parties, may be summarised as follows.
The background facts relating to the planning, conduct and dispersal of the demonstration at Bolotnaya Square are set out in more detail in Frumkin v. Russia (no. 74568/12, §§ 7-65, 5 January 2016), and Yaroslav Belousov v. Russia (nos. 2653/13 and 60980/14, §§ 7-33, 4 October 2016). The parties’ submissions on the circumstances directly relevant to the present case are set out below.
On 6 May 2012 a public demonstration entitled the “March of Millions” was held in central Moscow to protest against the allegedly rigged presidential elections. The event had been approved by the city authorities in the form of a march followed by a meeting at Bolotnaya Square which was supposed to end at 7.30 p.m. The march was peaceful and held without any disruptions, but when the marchers arrived at Bolotnaya Square it transpired that barriers installed by the police had narrowed the entrance to the meeting venue, allegedly restricting the space allocated for the meeting. To control the crowd, a police cordon forced the protestors to remain within the barriers, and there were numerous clashes between the police and protesters. At 5.30 p.m. the police ordered the organisers to finish the meeting early and began to disperse the participants. It took them about two hours to clear the protestors from the square.
On the same day the Moscow city department of the Investigative Committee of the Russian Federation opened a criminal investigation into suspected acts of mass disorder and violence against the police, offences under Articles 212 § 2 and 318 § 1 of the Criminal Code). On 18 May 2012 the file was transferred to the headquarters of the Investigative Committee for further investigation. On 28 May 2012 another investigation was launched into the criminal offence of organising acts of mass disorder (Article 212 § 1 of the Criminal Code). The two criminal cases were joined on the same day.
On 16 December 2013 the Investigative Committee disjoined the case against the first and second applicants and their two co-defendants from the main criminal case file concerning the mass disorder at Bolotnaya Square.
At the time of the events the first applicant was a student, working parttime. On 6 May 2012 he took part in the demonstration at Bolotnaya Square. According to him, he did not take part in any disorder or clashes with the police. He was arrested at the site of the demonstration and taken to the Ivanoskoye District police station in Moscow.
At the police station an on-duty officer drew up an administrativeoffence record stating that the applicant had disobeyed a lawful police order, an offence under Article 19.3 § 1 of the Code of Administrative Offences. In particular, it was stated that the applicant had broken the police cordon and thrown stones and glass bottles. When ordered to cease his actions, he had refused to do so.
On 8 May 2012 the first applicant was brought before the justice of the peace of Court Circuit no. 100 of the Yakimanka District in Moscow. He denied having broken the police cordon or having thrown bottles and stones at police officers. The court, relying on a police officer’s report, found him guilty as charged and sentenced him to fifteen days’ detention.
After his release from administrative detention, the first applicant continued to live at his usual address and pursue his activities.
On 6 February 2013 the applicant’s flat was searched and his travel passport seized, and he was arrested on suspicion of having participated in acts of mass disorder and of having used violence against the police during the demonstration of 6 May 2012. He was charged under Article 212 § 2 (participation in mass disorder) and Article 318 § 1 (violence against a public official) of the Criminal Code. He was accused, in particular, of grabbing a police officer’s uniform and of pushing him to the ground.
On 7 February 2013 the first applicant was placed in pre-trial detention where he remained for one year and six months. His pre-trial detention was examined by the Court in a separate case and was found to be unjustified (see Kovyazin and Others v. Russia, nos. 13008/13 and 2 others, §§ 79-94, 17 September 2015).
On 20 November 2013 final charges were brought against the first applicant under Articles 212 § 2 and 318 § 1 of the Criminal Code.
On 14 April 2014 the Zamoskvoretskiy District Court of Moscow began the trial in a criminal case against four participants in the demonstration at Bolotnaya Square, including both applicants, who were charged with participation in acts of mass disorder and committing acts of violence against police officers.
On 25 July 2014, during a court hearing, the first applicant requested that the court grant a stay of proceedings in respect of the charges under Article 212 § 2 of the Criminal Code on the grounds that the acts with which he was charged were covered by the administrative offence of which he had been convicted on 8 May 2012. The court found no grounds to grant his request.
On an unspecified date police officer A., the alleged victim of the first applicant’s assault, was questioned as a witness. He testified that when he had been arresting one of the active participants, someone had pulled his helmet and bullet-proof vest, blocking his access to air. He had fallen to the ground; when he had tried to get up, someone had pushed him again, causing him to fall. When he had managed to stand up, he had seen a young man whom he had later identified as the applicant. The man had then disappeared in the crowd. According to A., he had felt pain as a result of the first applicant’s actions but had not asked for medical assistance. Another police officer, D., also questioned as a witness, testified that he had seen the applicant holding on to A.’s bullet-proof vest and trying to push him to the ground.
On 18 August 2014 the Zamoskvoretskiy District Court of Moscow found the applicant guilty as charged. It held, in particular, as follows:
“On 6 May 2012, at 5 p.m. at the latest, [the applicant] ... arrived at Bolotnaya Square in Moscow to take part in the demonstration ...
Between 5 p.m. and 10 p.m. [the applicant] took part in the acts of mass disorder ... Acting with intent, ... he used violence against ... police officer [A.], which did not pose a threat to the life or health of that officer.
 [The first applicant] ..., acting with intent with the aim of using violence, tried to prevent police officers from arresting aggressive participants ... Standing behind [A.] ... he grabbed the latter’s bullet-proof vest with his right hand and his anti-riot helmet with his left hand and, acting together with an unidentified person, dragged [A.] away and then pushed him ... to the ground.
These actions of [the applicant] caused [A.] pain. ...
[The first applicant] has pleaded not guilty to the crime under Article 212 § 2 of the Criminal Code but has partially confessed to the [use of violence against a public official].
[The first applicant] testified that when police officers had started using force, special means and truncheons against [participants in the demonstration], he had heard a cry for help and had seen a man lying on the ground. A police officer, who had later turned out to be [A.], had been bent over the man, beating him with a truncheon. [The first applicant] had grabbed [A.’s] uniform and pulled it up. He had not hit or pushed anyone. [A.] had not fallen to the ground as a result of [the applicant’s] actions. However, [the first applicant] was aware that by grabbing a police officer’s ([A.’s]) uniform, he had committed a crime under Article 318 § 1 of the Criminal Code. [The first applicant] did not deny that afterwards he had been standing in a line with [others] impeding the police from arresting the demonstrators.
[The first applicant] also stated that on [6 May 2012] he had been arrested, taken to the police station and convicted by a justice of the peace under Article 19.3 § 1 of the Code of Administrative Offences. ...
... the court has not established any facts showing unlawful behaviour on the part of the police, contrary to the allegations of the defendants and their counsel. Moreover, the court finds that the police officers acted lawfully during the demonstration on 6 May 2012 ...
[The first applicant’s] arguments that the criminal proceedings and his prosecution should be terminated on the grounds that he has already been subjected to administrative liability for the same act ... cannot be considered well-founded because on 8 May 2012 [he] was convicted of failure to obey a lawful order of the police ... and his acts fell within the scope of the administrative offence set out in Article 19.3 of the Code of Administrative Offences ... However, [his] participation in mass disorder and his use of violence ... against a public official ... are not covered by the scope of the offence provided for in Article 19.3 of the Code of Administrative Offences, as the administrative offence and the crimes had different objects and were committed at different times, albeit consecutively.”
The District Court relied, inter alia, on a video recording showing how the applicant had grabbed A.’s bullet-proof vest and helmet and had pushed him. It also relied on the records of identification parades, according to which A. and D. had identified the applicant as the man who had used violence against A.
The applicant was sentenced to two years and six months’ imprisonment, calculated on the basis of a two-year prison term under Article 212 § 2 of the Criminal Code, running partly concurrently with a term of one year under Article 318 § 1 of the Convention. The applicant’s pre-trial detention counted towards the prison sentence.
On 27 November 2014 the Moscow City Court upheld the firstinstance judgment. It dismissed, among other arguments, the applicant’s allegation that he had been tried and convicted twice for the same offence.
The applicant was released on 8 August 2015 having served his prison term.
At the time of his arrest the second applicant was working as a financial consultant. He was a member of the Opposition Coordination Council, a political movement. On 6 May 2012 he and his partner took part in the demonstration at Bolotnaya Square. When the police were dispersing the protestors he intervened in what he perceived as an arbitrary arrest of another protestor. The police applied force against him. According to the second applicant, he was severely beaten up and received medical assistance in an ambulance present at the venue.
On 2 July 2012 the second applicant lodged a complaint with the Investigative Committee, alleging police brutality. He attached a medical certificate confirming the injuries caused to him on 6 May 2012.
On 28 April 2013 the second applicant was detained on suspicion of having participated in acts of mass disorder and of having used violence against the police during the demonstration of 6 May 2012, offences under Articles 212 § 2 and 318 § 1 of the Criminal Code respectively. He was accused, in particular, of pulling police officer I. by the leg, dragging him away from another protestor and pulling I. down to the ground. Unidentified protestors had then allegedly hit I. on the head. On the same day the second applicant’s pre-trial detention was ordered.
On 26 August 2013 police officer B. identified the second applicant as the protestor who had pulled him by the left arm out of the chain of police officers during the clashes at Bolotnaya Square.
On 20 November 2013 the second applicant was questioned by the investigators. He confessed to having pulled Officer I. by the leg to prevent him from arresting another protestor.
On 13 December 2013 the investigators referred the second applicant’s complaint of ill-treatment “to a competent authority”. The applicant was not aware of any follow-up to his complaint.
On 6 December 2013 the investigators questioned Ms L.A., who had participated in the demonstration at Bolotnaya Square. She had witnessed a police officer kicking the second applicant in the face; she had then provided the latter with first aid on the spot.
On 14 April 2014 the Zamoskvoretskiy District Court of Moscow began the hearing of the criminal case against the applicants and two codefendants. The hearings took place in hearing rooms nos. 403 and 410 of the courthouse, which were equipped with metal cages in which the defendants were held during the hearings. One hearing during the firstinstance trial took place at the Moscow City Court in hearing room no. 338, which was equipped with a glass cabin (for the description of conditions of detention in that room, see Yaroslav Belousov (cited above, §§ 74-75).
In its judgment of 18 August 2014, the Zamoskvoretskiy District Court of Moscow found the second applicant guilty as charged. It held, in particular:
“On 6 May 2012 at 5 p.m. at the latest [the second applicant] ... arrived at Bolotnaya Square in Moscow to take part in the demonstration ...
Between 5 p.m. and 8 p.m. ... [the second applicant] ... took part in acts of mass disorder ... Acting with intent ... he used violence against ... police officer [I.], which did not pose a threat to the life or health of that officer. In particular, [the applicant] ... tried to prevent police officers, including [I.], from arresting another protestor ... he grabbed [I.] by the leg and ... using violence together with ... unidentified persons, dragged [I.] away from the protestor and pulled him to the ground. Then unidentified persons hit [I.] in the head at least twice.
As a result of [the applicant’s] and other persons’ actions, the protestor was able to escape from the police.
... [The second applicant], acting with intent ... also used violence against police officer [B.] ... In particular ... [the applicant], who was standing behind [B.], pulled the latter by the left arm and ... using violence, abruptly pulled [B.] out of the chain of police officers, thereby breaking the chain and making a passage in it for those participating in the mass disorder.
... [The second applicant’s] actions caused [B.] physical pain. ...
[The second applicant] has pleaded not guilty ... He testified that he had been in front of the cordon when the clashes had begun ... he had pulled one of the police officers, who later turned out to be [B.], by the arm. He had not hit [B.]. ... Later [the applicant] had seen a group of police officers trying to arrest a young man ... [They] had pushed him to the ground, grabbed him by his legs and, as the applicant had thought, had started to beat the man with truncheons. ... [The second applicant] had approached a police officer, who later turned out to be [I.], and dragged him away to a metre’s distance, without using violence. ... The young man had then stood up and had run in the direction of the crowd; [I.] had followed him. [The applicant] had seen that a few protestors had approached [I.] and had hit him ... at least twice.
... [The second applicant] additionally stated that during the demonstration on 6 May 2012 he had been beaten up by the police without any reason ... he had lodged a criminal complaint thereof with the law-enforcement authorities but they had refused to open a criminal investigation [into his allegations of ill-treatment]. ...
... the court has not established any facts showing unlawful behaviour on the part of the police, contrary to the allegations of the defendants and their counsel. Moreover, the court finds that the police officers acted lawfully during the demonstration on 6 May 2012 ...”
The second applicant was sentenced to three years and six months’ imprisonment, calculated on the basis of a three-year prison term under Article 212 § 2 of the Criminal Code, to run partly concurrently with a term of one year and six months under Article 318 § 1 of the Convention. His pre-trial detention counted towards the prison sentence.
On 27 November 2014 the Moscow City Court upheld the firstinstance judgment.
The applicant was released on 27 October 2016, having served his prison term.
The Criminal Code of the Russian Federation provides as follows:
Article 212. Mass disorder
“1.  The organisation of mass disorder, accompanied by violence, riots, arson, destruction of property, the use of firearms, explosives and explosive devices, as well by armed resistance to a public official, shall be punishable by four to ten years’ deprivation of liberty.
Participation in the types of mass disorder provided for by paragraph 1 of this Article shall be punishable by three to eight years’ deprivation of liberty.
The instigation of mass disorder provided for by paragraph 1 of this Article, or the instigation of participation in such acts, or the instigation of violence against citizens, shall be punishable by a restriction of liberty for up to two years, or community service for up to two years, or deprivation of liberty for the same term.”
Article 318. Use of violence against a public official
“1.  The use of violence which does not endanger life or health, or the threat to use such violence against a public official or his relatives in connection with the performance of his or her duties shall be punishable by a fine of up to 200,000 roubles or an equivalent of the convicted person’s wages for 18 months, or community service for up to five years, or up to five years’ deprivation of liberty ...”
The relevant provisions of the Code of Administrative Offences of 30 December 2001 in force at the material time read as follows:
Article 19.3 Refusal to obey a lawful order of a police officer ...
“Failure to obey a lawful order or demand of a police officer ... in connection with the performance of the officer’s official duties relating to maintaining public order and security, or impeding the officer’s performance of his or her official duties, shall be punishable by a fine of between RUB 500 and RUB 1,000 or by administrative detention for up to fifteen days.”