The case originated in two applications (nos. 19150/13 and 52022/13) against the Republic of Azerbaijan lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by an Azerbaijani national, Mr Vusal Abit oglu Bayramov (“the applicant”), on 27 February and 13 March 2013 respectively.
The applicant was represented by Mr R. Mustafazade, a lawyer practising in Azerbaijan. The Azerbaijani Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Mr Ç. Asgarov.
On 2 October 2014 the complaints concerning Articles 5, 6, 10 and 11 of the Convention, raised in both applications, were communicated to the Government and the remainder of both applications was declared inadmissible.
The Government objected to the examination of the applications by a Committee. After having considered the Government’s objection, the Court rejected it.
The applicant was born in 1988 and lives in Baku.
The opposition planned to hold demonstrations on 12 and 26 January 2013 in Baku.
No prior notice was given to the relevant authority, the Baku City Executive Authority (“the BCEA”), by the organisers of the demonstrations. Information about the demonstrations was disseminated through Facebook or the press.
According to the applicant, the demonstrations were intended to be peaceful and were conducted in a peaceful manner. The participants in the demonstration of 12 January 2013 were drawing the public’s attention to the deaths of soldiers in the army. The participants in the demonstration of 26 January 2013 were condemning the use of force by the police against those who had participated in previous demonstrations.
The applicant attended both demonstrations, but shortly after they had begun the police started to disperse the assemblies. In both cases the applicant was arrested during the dispersal operation and was taken to a police station, where he was questioned.
In both cases, on the day of applicant’s arrest an “administrative-offence report” (inzibati xəta haqqında protokol) was issued in respect of him. The reports stated that the applicant had committed an administrative offence under Article 298.2 (participation in a public assembly that had not been organised in accordance with the law) of the Code of Administrative Offences (“the CAO”).
According to the applicant, he was never served with copies of the administrative-offence reports or with other documents in his case files. In neither case was he given access to a lawyer after his arrest or while in police custody.
A statement (ərizə) written by the applicant on 12 January 2013 at the police station and submitted to the Court by the Government showed that in the first case, the applicant had declared that he would defend himself in person.
A statement written by the applicant on 26 January 2013 at the police station and submitted to the Court by the Government showed that in the second case the applicant had declared that he did “not need a lawyer because of his financial [situation]”.
In the first case, after having been held for a few hours in police custody, the applicant was released, subject to an undertaking to reappear at the police station on 14 January 2013.
In the first case, the applicant was brought before the Nasimi District Court on 14 January 2013, the day he reappeared at the police station. In the second case he was brought before the Nasimi District Court on 26 January 2013, the day of his arrest.
According to the applicant, the hearing before the court in both cases was very brief. Members of the public were not allowed to attend, even though the court had not taken a formal decision to close the hearing to the public.
According to the applicant, in both cases he was not given an opportunity to hire a lawyer of his own choice.
A statement signed by the applicant on 14 January 2013 and submitted to the Court by the Government showed that in the first case, the applicant had declared that he did not need legal assistance and would defend himself in person.
At the court hearing in the second case, a State-funded lawyer was appointed to assist the applicant.
The record of the court hearing in the second case shows that in his oral submissions, the State-funded lawyer briefly stated that there had been elements of the administrative offence in the applicant’s actions, and asked the court to adopt a fair decision.
In both cases, the court questioned police officers who had participated in the dispersal operations and police officers who had prepared the administrative-offence reports against the applicant. The police officers testified that the applicant had staged an unauthorised demonstration.
In both cases the first-instance court found that the applicant had participated in an unauthorised demonstration.
In both cases, by decisions of 14 and 26 January 2013 respectively, the first-instance court convicted the applicant under Article 298.2 of the CAO. The court sentenced him to fines of 500 manats (AZN) and AZN 400 respectively.
On unspecified dates the applicant lodged appeals before the Baku Court of Appeal, arguing that his convictions were in violation of his rights because the demonstrations in which he had participated had been peaceful. He also complained that his arrests had been unlawful and that the hearings before the respective first-instance courts had not been fair.
In the first case, the applicant was not represented before the Baku Court of Appeal by a lawyer. At the appellate court hearing in the second case the applicant was represented by the same lawyer who had represented him before the first-instance court.
In both cases, on 25 January and 6 February 2013 respectively, the Baku Court of Appeal dismissed the applicant’s appeal and upheld the decision of the first-instance court.
At the time of both of the applicant’s arrests, under Article 5 § IV of the Law on Freedom of Assembly of 13 November 1998 no prior written notification was required for spontaneous assemblies.
Before the amendments introduced by Law no. 462-IVQD of 2 November 2012, which entered into force on 1 January 2013, any breach of the rules on the organisation and holding of assemblies was punishable under Article 298 of the Code of Administrative Offences of 2000 (“the CAO”) by a reprimand or a fine of AZN 7 to 13. At the time of the applicant’s arrests, both of which occurred after the amendments were enacted, Article 298 of the CAO provided as follows:
“298.1.  For any breach of the rules, set forth under the legislation, on the organisation and holding of assemblies, demonstrations, protests, marches and pickets by an organiser of an assembly – an individual shall be punished by a fine of 1,500 to 3,000 manats [AZN]; or, depending on the circumstances of the case and the personality of the perpetrator of the offence, by community service for 200 to 240 hours or administrative detention for up to 15 days; a person in charge [shall be punished] by a fine of 3,000 to 6,000 manats [AZN]; a legal entity [shall be punished] by a fine of 15,000 to 30,000 manats [AZN].
2  Participation in an assembly, a demonstration, a protest, a march or a picket which was not organised in accordance with the rules, set forth under the legislation, shall be punishable by a fine of 300 to 600 manats [AZN]; or, depending on the circumstances of the case and the personality of the perpetrator of the offence, by community service for 160 to 200 hours or administrative detention for up to 15 days.
Note: If there are elements of a crime in actions proscribed under Articles 298.1 and 298.2 of the present Code, the perpetrator of those actions bears criminal responsibility under the relevant Articles of the Criminal Code of the Republic of Azerbaijan.”
According to presidential Order (sərəncam) no. 1866 of 1 December 2011, which was in force until 1 September 2013, the minimum wage in Azerbaijan was AZN 93.5.
The relevant extracts of Resolution 1917 (2013) of the Parliamentary Assembly of the Council of Europe: “The honouring of obligations and commitments by Azerbaijan” read as follows:
“... 10.  Regrettably, there is no political dialogue with the opposition parties outside parliament. The Assembly is concerned by the restrictive climate for the activities of the extra-parliamentary opposition, which complains about limitations imposed on freedom of expression and freedom of assembly and the lack of access to the public media.
The establishment of an inclusive political system and a truly competitive and unrestrictive political environment requires full implementation of basic freedoms, including freedom of expression, freedom of assembly and freedom of association. The situation in Azerbaijan is preoccupying and the Assembly expresses its deep concern in this regard.
Recently adopted amendments to the Criminal Code and the Administrative Code, which have increased penalties for the organisers of, and participants in, “unauthorised” gatherings, raise concern. Considering the authorities’ ongoing blanket ban on protests in the Baku city centre, these amendments are likely to have a further negative impact on freedom of assembly and freedom of expression. The restrictive use of certain articles of the Criminal Code, in particular Articles 221 and 233, against participants in peaceful, albeit unauthorised, demonstrations, is another matter of concern. ...”
The relevant extracts of Report (CommDH(2013)14) of 6 August 2013 by Nils Muižnieks, the Commissioner for Human Rights of the Council of Europe, following his visit to Azerbaijan from 22 to 24 May 2013, read as follows:
“... 76.  The Commissioner is deeply concerned by the recent amendments to the Law on Freedom of Assembly, the Criminal Code and the Code of Administrative Offences, which further erode the right to freedom of assembly. The sanctions which can now be imposed, coupled with the fact that local authorities have not authorised a single rally in Baku city centre in recent years, clearly have a chilling effect on the organisation of or participation in demonstrations.
The Commissioner is of the view that participants in peaceful assemblies should not be sanctioned for the mere fact of being present at and actively participating in the demonstration in question, provided they do not do anything illegal, violent or obscene in the course of it. The Commissioner therefore urges the authorities to ensure that no disproportionate sanction, which would undermine the fundamental right to peaceful assembly, is imposed. ...”
For a summary of other relevant provisions concerning administrative proceedings, the relevant provisions concerning the organisation and holding of public assemblies, and the relevant extracts of international documents, see the judgment in the case of Gafgaz Mammadov v. Azerbaijan (no. 60259/11, §§ 27-42, 15 October 2015).