The case originated in an application (no. 9106/06) against the  lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Moldovan non-governmental organisation, Genderdoc-M (“the applicant association”), on 7 March 2006.
The applicant association was represented by Ms Natalia Mardari, a lawyer practising in Chisinau. The Moldovan Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Mr Vladimir Grosu.
As Mr Mihai Poalelungi, the judge elected in respect of Moldova, had withdrawn from the case (Rule 28 of the Rules of Court), the President of the Chamber appointed Mr Ján Šikuta to sit as an ad hoc judge (Article 26 § 4 of the Convention and Rule 29 § 1 of the Rules of Court).
On 23 May 2008 the application was communicated to the Government. It was also decided to rule on the admissibility and merits of the application at the same time (Article 29 § 1).
Third-party comments were received from the International Commission of Jurists, which had been given leave by the President to intervene in the written procedure (Article 36 § 2 of the Convention and Rule 44 § 3 of the Rules of Court).
The applicant, Genderdoc-M, is a non-governmental organisation based in  whose object is to provide information and to assist the LGBT community.
On 7 April 2005 the applicant association applied to Chişinău Municipal Council for authorisation to hold a peaceful demonstration in front of the Parliament on 27 May 2005, to encourage the adoption of laws to protect sexual minorities from discrimination.
On 27 April 2005 the Chişinău Municipal Council rejected the application on the ground that the applicant association’s demonstration was baseless, since a law on the protection of national minorities had already been adopted.
On 6 May 2005 the Mayor’s Office also refused permission for the proposed demonstration, on the grounds that there was a law on the protection of national minorities already in place and that there were legal provisions which dictated which individuals had the power of legislative initiative required to promote laws.
The applicant association contested the decision of the Chişinău Mayor’s Office of 6 May 2005. It argued that the ban on their demonstration was illegal and discriminatory.
On 2 June 2005 the Chişinău Court of Appeal allowed the applicant association’s action and declared the Chişinău Mayor’s Office decision of 6 May 2005 void. Chişinău Court of Appeal found the following:
“...The court considers legally ungrounded the arguments relied on by the defendant to justify its refusal to authorise the assembly, as the law does not provide such grounds for the non-authorisation of an assembly. The decision as to whether to authorise or not to authorise an assembly should not be made conditional either on the nature of the problems the participants intend to bring to society’s attention, or on the status of those problems.
Under these circumstances the court concludes that the decision of the Mayor’s Office dated 6 May 2005 was issued contrary to the provisions of Article 26 (1) of the Law regarding administrative complaints, and was thus illegal and void. As to the plaintiff’s other complaints, including the Mayor’s Office’s noncompliance with the time-limit of forty-eight hours for notification of the refusal of authorisation for the assembly required under section 14 of the Law regarding the organisation and conduct of assemblies, the court declares them illfounded.”
The Chişinău Mayor’s Office appealed against the decision of the Chişinău Court of Appeal of 2 June 2005. The Mayor’s Office argued that they had received many requests from individuals and associations which were vehemently against the authorisation of the demonstration, and who opposed the adoption of any law legalising homosexual partnerships. The requests had laid emphasis on various legal provisions that concerned the protection of marriage and the family.
On 7 September 2005 the Supreme Court of Justice allowed the appeal lodged by the Mayor’s Office, quashed the Chişinău Court of Appeal decision of 2 June 2005 and decided to send the case to the Court of Appeal for re-examination.
In their submissions to the Court of Appeal, the Mayor’s Office argued that the holding of an assembly for the promotion of the rights of sexual minorities would endanger public order and social morality and, moreover, that the organisers had not assumed any responsibility as regards the demonstration’s good management.
The applicant association argued that the ban was illegal and discriminatory.
On 14 June 2006 the Court of Appeal found against the applicant association. The applicant association appealed against this decision.
On 18 October 2006 the Supreme Court of Justice upheld the decision of the Court of Appeal of 14 June 2006. It found that the applicant association had failed to give undertakings as regards a number of obligations required by the law in respect of assemblies, such as: to respect the law; to designate a person or persons in charge of the conduct of the demonstration; to create together with the police a group of people responsible for the maintenance of public order; to mark the site of the demonstration with special signs; to pay the Municipal Council any fees related to the arrangement of the site of the demonstration; to establish the route to and from the site of the demonstration; to provide the police with unfettered access to the site of the demonstration; and to forbid the participation of certain persons. Moreover, the court considered that there was a risk that the demonstration would cause a breach of public order.
Law no. 560-XIII of 21 July 1995 regarding the organisation and conduct of assemblies provides, as relevant, the following:
“Section 5 – Notification of Assemblies
Assemblies may be held only after the organisers have duly notified the urban mayor’s (municipal) or rural offices.
Section 11 – Preliminary notification
(1)  The organiser of an assembly must lodge a notification with the mayor’s office at least fifteen days before the chosen date, according to the model provided in the appendix which is part of the present law.
(2)  The preliminary notification should indicate:
(a)  the name of the organiser, the aim of the assembly;
(b)  the date and time the assembly is to begin and end;
(c)  where the assembly will take place and the routes to and from the place;
(d)  the form the assembly will take;
(e)  the approximate number of participants;
(f)  those appointed to ensure the good conduct of the assembly and to be responsible for it;
(g)  the services the organisers require from the mayor’s office.
(3)  The Mayor’s Office may in justified cases modify, with the organiser’s consent, elements of the preliminary notification.
Section 13
After examining the preliminary declaration, the Mayor’s Office shall issue one of the following decisions and inform the organiser about it:
(a)  grant permission;
(b)  refuse permission under section 12 (6).
Section 15
(1)  The organiser can contest the refuse to authorise an assembly.
(2)  The relevant judicial body shall decide upon the organiser’s contestation within 5 days from its lodging.”
Section 34 of Law no. 123 of 18 March 2003 regarding local public administration provides that:
“(1)  ... the Mayor undertakes the following functions over... administered territory:
in the field of legal order:
...
(f)  Undertakes legal measures regarding the conduct of public assemblies: ...
(g)  Undertakes measures forbidding or suspending shows, presentations and other public demonstrations which contradict legal order and morals.”
The Moldovan Constitution contains the following relevant provisions:
“Article 54 - Restricting the Exercise of Certain Rights or Freedoms
(1)  The exercise of certain rights or freedoms may be restricted only under the law and only as required for: the defence of national security, of public order, health or morals, of citizens’ rights and freedoms, the carrying out of investigations in criminal cases, the prevention of the consequences of a natural calamity or of a technological disaster.
(2)  The restrictions enforced must be in proportion to the situation that caused them, and may not affect the existence of that right or liberty.”
The Moldovan Civil Code stipulates in Article 184:
“An association is a non-commercial organisation established voluntarily by associated individuals and legal entities under provisions of the law on the basis of community of interests, which are consistent with public order and good morals, for the purpose of meeting various non-material needs.”
Declares the application admissible unanimously;
Holds unanimously that there has been a violation of Article 11 of the Convention;
Holds unanimously that there has been a violation of Article 13 in conjunction with Article 11 of the Convention;
Holds by five votes to two that there has been a violation of Article 14 in conjunction with Article 11 of the Convention;
Holds unanimously that there is no need to examine separately Article 6 § 1 and Article 10 of the Convention;
Holds by six votes to one
(a)  that the respondent State is to pay the applicant association, within three months of the date on which the judgment becomes final in accordance with Article 44 § 2 of the Convention, the following amounts, to be converted into Moldovan lei at the rate applicable on the date of settlement:
(b)  that from the expiry of the above-mentioned three months until settlement simple interest shall be payable on the above amounts at a rate equal to the marginal lending rate of the European Central Bank during the default period plus three percentage points.
Done in English, and notified in writing on 12 June 2012, pursuant to Rule 77 §§ 2 and 3 of the Rules of Court.
In accordance with Article 45 § 2 of the Convention and Rule 74 § 2 of the Rules of Court, the separate opinions of Judges Myjer, Gyulumyan and Ziemele are annexed to this judgment.
I voted with the majority in finding a violation of Article 14 in conjunction with Article 11.
Still, I am not convinced by the underlying reasoning laid down in the judgment.
What happened in this case? The applicant in 2005 applied for authorisation to hold a peaceful demonstration in front of the Parliament, to encourage the passing of laws to protect sexual minorities. The authorisation was not given. The official reason for this refusal was that the demonstration was baseless, since a law on national minorities had already been passed (see paragraphs 8 and 9 of the judgment).
Interestingly, later on, when the applicant appealed, all of a sudden other totally new reasons were put forward by the authorities:
-  the Mayor’s Office had received many requests from individuals and associations who were vehemently against the authorisation of the demonstration and who opposed the passing of any law legalising homosexual relationships (see paragraph 12);
-  the holding of an assembly for the promotion of the rights of sexual minorities would endanger public order and social morality, and, moreover, the organisers had not assumed any responsibility as regards the demonstration’s good management (see paragraph 14).
If the authorities had stuck to the initial reasons given and no other evidence had been available, it would have been hard for the Court to establish discrimination, provided that the authorities meant to include sexual minorities among national minorities. Owing to the fact that the authorities chose to invent and put forward new reasons, the authorities themselves provided the underlying material to enable the Court to establish a discriminatory intent. Looking at the different reasons and the sequence in which they were given, one can now safely deduce that the first reasons given were only designed to cover up the real reasoning behind the refusal. The same applies to the last reasons given: it would be totally unrealistic to accept that the permission was initially refused because the organisers had not assumed any responsibility as regards the demonstration’s good management. Admittedly, the Supreme Court in its decision of 18 October 2006 paid much attention to this new line of reasoning. But if that had been the real reason behind the refusal, it should have been put forward right at the beginning. And again, if that had been the case, it would have been hard for the Court to establish an intent to discriminate.
That leaves us with the simple conclusion that the refusal must have had to do with a reason which the authorities did not dare to mention. And the only logical reason which is left is: they did not give authorisation because apparently they did not want a demonstration which had to do with the rights of sexual minorities/homosexuals. Is it fair to draw that conclusion? Yes, in the circumstances of the case, this is possible. The first new line of reasoning, as referred to in paragraph 12, is sufficiently conclusive in this regard.
Maybe the authorities did in fact refuse the authorisation because of, as the majority put it, their “disapproval of demonstrations which they considered to promote homosexuality” (see paragraph 54 of the judgment). However, I wonder where the majority find any indication that a proposed demonstration to encourage the passing of laws to protect sexual minorities was also intended to promote homosexuality as such, or that the authorities considered that the demonstration would promote homosexuality.
We do not share the view of the majority regarding the violation of Article 14 in conjunction with Article 11 as set out in their reasoning. The majority base their view on two main grounds. First, they find that the Government have not convincingly proved their allegation that there was a systemic problem concerning the exercise of freedom of assembly. The Government claimed that assemblies were not allowed in general, whereas the applicant association showed that some assemblies had in fact been allowed. The majority consider that this fact indicates a difference in treatment in relation to the applicant association. Second, the majority find that the arguments of the Chişinău Mayor’s Office in the court proceedings were of a discriminatory character. The majority also state that all the relevant levels of authority provided different reasons.
This is one possible way of reading the arguments of the parties in the case. There is, however, another way of interpreting these arguments. For example, the statement by the Mayor’s Office that it had received protest letters from numerous Moldovan citizens asking it to prohibit the gay parade is most likely true. The fact that the Mayor’s Office brought this fact to the attention of the national courts per se does not confirm that it adopted a discriminatory attitude or, for that matter, that the national courts agreed or disagreed with its request. In the final instance the national courts mentioned two grounds for their decision to uphold the ban imposed by the Mayor’s Office. The first ground was the danger to public order and morality and the second ground was that the organisers had not complied with the prescription of the law requiring them to accept responsibility for the event. These reasons in themselves are neither discriminatory nor unreasonable. The fact that two different compositions of the same court might disagree on the outcome of the case is not arbitrary in itself either.
What should have been the test to be applied in this case? The majority correctly refer to the principles developed in Kozak v. Poland (no. 13102/02, 2 March 2010), in which the Court said that where a difference in treatment was based solely on sexual orientation, it constituted a violation of the Convention. In view of this criterion, the majority should have assessed whether the applicant association’s assembly was banned solely on this ground, as compared to the other bans of assemblies that the Government referred to, in relation to which the Court has had the opportunity to render several judgments regarding the same period of time. The Government argued that there was a general atmosphere of intolerance towards different views at the time in . It certainly cannot be said that the applicant association was the only group whose right to assembly was restricted (contrast Oršuš and Others v. Croatia [GC], no. 15766/03, § 155, ECHR 2010). There may indeed be some truth in what the Government stated about the rather intolerant political situation in the country at the time.
The Court’s case-law under Article 14 requires a detailed analysis of whether a difference in treatment is discriminatory if we assume that the applicant association was treated differently from others. Such a difference in treatment will amount to discrimination if “it has no objective and reasonable justification”, that is, if it does not pursue a “legitimate aim” or if there is not a “reasonable relationship of proportionality” between the means employed and the aim sought to be realised (see, among many other authorities, Larkos v. Cyprus [GC], no. 29515/95, § 29, ECHR 1999-I; Stec and Others v. the United Kingdom [GC], no. 65731/01, § 51, ECHR 2006-VI; and D.H. and Others v. the Czech Republic [GC], no. 57325/00, § 196, ECHR 2007IV). Where the difference in treatment is based on race, colour or ethnic origin, the notion of objective and reasonable justification must be interpreted as strictly as possible (see Sampanis and Others v. Greece, no. 32526/05, § 69, 5 June 2008). We might add that in view of the Kozak case (cited above), sexual orientation should be added to this list.
As far as we can see, there were reasonable arguments submitted by the Government in explaining the actions of the authorities (see paragraph 17 of the judgment). The crux of the matter really lies in an assessment of the proportionality of the difference in treatment, as compared to other possible assemblies that were or were not allowed for the same reasons of public order. This analysis is missing. There is an all too easy assumption that the decisions of the national authorities were discriminatory. As we said, this might well be true but in a judicial decision, something more is needed to come to that conclusion.