On 11 June 2013 the applicants participated in a public assembly in front of the State Duma in Moscow in response to the legislative ban on the ‘promotion of non-traditional sexual relations among minors’. They were arrested and convicted of an administrative offence.
The applicants’ details are set out in the appended table. The applicants in application no. 67685/14 were represented by Ms T. S. Glushkova and the applicant in application no. 35199/15 was represented by Mr K. N. Koroteyev, lawyers of the Memorial Human Rights Centre.
The Russian Government (“the Government”) were represented initially by Mr G. Matyushkin, Representative of the Russian Federation to the European Court of Human Rights, and then by his successor in that office, Mr M. Galperin.
The facts of the case, as submitted by the parties, may be summarised as follows.
On 6 June 2013 the mass media announced that the second and third readings of the bill banning the ‘promotion of non-traditional sexual relations among minors’ were to take place on 11 June 2013 in the State Duma.
On 11 June 2013 at around noon a group of opponents of the bill, including the applicants, came to the entrance of the State Duma building facing Georgiyevskiy Lane in Moscow. Journalists were present there, as well as a group of conservative Orthodox Christian activists who were supporting the bill. Riot officers from the Moscow Police Department stood between the opponents of the bill and the Christian activists. Christian activists chanted “Moscow is not Sodom!” The bill opponents chanted “Moscow is not Iran” and “Fascism shall not pass”.
At around 12.15 p.m. the police officers surrounded the anti-bill protesters and pushed them into police buses. According to the applicants, none of the activists supporting the bill were apprehended in this way. According to the Government, during the assembly the police also apprehended several supporters of the bill.
The applicants were transferred to various police stations in Moscow where the relevant administrative records were drawn up. The administrative offence records were based on the reports and explanations of the police officers who had arrested the applicants. On the same day, once the administrative records were finalised the applicants were released.
On various dates the domestic courts convicted the applicants under Article 20.2 § 5 of the Code of Administrative Offences (the CAO) and sentenced them to administrative fines (see the appended table).
Relying on the administrative records and reports and explanations of the police officers, the domestic courts found the applicants liable for violating the established procedure for the conduct of a public assembly on account of their participation in the unauthorised gathering. In particular, the courts considered unlawful that some of the applicants shouted slogans and/or failed to verify whether the gathering was legitimate.
Article 20.2 § 5 of the Code of Administrative Offences provides that violation by a participant in a public event of the established procedure for conducting a public event is punishable by a fine of 10,000 to 20,000 Russian roubles or up to forty hours of community work.
For a summary of other relevant domestic provisions see Navalnyy v. Russia [GC] (nos. 29580/12 and 4 others, §§ 46-47, 15 November 2018), and Lashmankin and Others v. Russia (nos. 57818/09 and 14 others, §§ 223 and 226, 7 February 2017).
The domestic legal provisions governing administrative transfer (escorting) and detention are also set out in the case of Butkevich v. Russia (no. 5865/07, §§ 33-36, 13 February 2018).
According to Article 31.9 of the Code of Administrative Offences, if a decision imposing an administrative punishment is not enforced within two years from its entry into force, it can no longer be executed. The time when the enforcement of such a decision is suspended or stayed is excluded from the aforementioned period.
Appendix