The case originated in an application (no. 6562/03) against the  lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by an Armenian national, Mr Armen Mkrtchyan (“the applicant”), on 25 November 2002.
The applicant, who had been granted legal aid, was represented by Mr N. Baghdasaryan, a lawyer practising in . The Armenian Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Mr G. Kostanyan, Representative of the  at the European Court of Human Rights.
The applicant alleged that the interference with his right to freedom of peaceful assembly was contrary to the guarantees of Article 11 of the Convention, in particular, that it was not prescribed by law.
The application was allocated to the Third Section of the Court (Rule 52 § 1 of the Rules of Court). Within that Section, the Chamber that would consider the case (Article 27 § 1 of the Convention) was constituted as provided in Rule 26 § 1.
By a decision of 20 October 2005, the Court declared the application partly admissible.
The applicant and the Government each filed further written observations (Rule 59 § 1). The Chamber having decided, after consulting the parties, that no hearing on the merits was required (Rule 59 § 3 in fine), the parties replied in writing to each other's observations.
The applicant was born in 1972 and lives in .
The applicant at the material time was a member of the “Republic” Party («Հանրապետություն» կուսակցություն).
On 10 May 2002 the “Republic” Party applied to the Mayor of Yerevan for permission to hold a demonstration on  in  on 14 May 2002.
On 13 May 2002 the Mayor authorised the demonstration as requested.
The demonstration was held as planned on 14 May 2002, at around 15.00, on . It was jointly organised by the “Republic” Party and six other political parties. The applicant participated in the demonstration.
Following the demonstration, at around 16.00, the applicant called on participants to hold a procession through the  towards the Parliament building. It appears that a crowd of people followed the applicant in a procession along the Avenue.
The same day, at 23.10, the applicant was arrested and brought to the Arabkir District Police Station of Yerevan (ՀՀ ոստիկանության Երևան քաղաքի Արաբկիրի բաժին). The record of an administrative offence (վարչական իրավախախտման արձանագրություն) prepared by the police officers stated that the applicant had “organised an unlawful procession and violated the prescribed rules for holding demonstrations and street processions”.
On 15 May 2002 the Kentron and Nork-Marash District Court of Yerevan (Երևան քաղաքի Կենտրոն և Նորք-Մարաշ համայնքների առաջին ատյանի դատարան) examined the applicant's case. The District Court found that:
“[The applicant], in violation of the prescribed rules for holding street processions and demonstrations, on 14 May 2002 at around 16.00 o'clock, participated with a group of people in an unauthorised procession. Thus, he has committed an offence envisaged by Article 180.1 of the Code of Administrative Offences [(Վարչական իրավախախտումների վերաբերյալ ՀՀ օրենսգիրք)]. Taking into consideration the circumstances of the case and the personality of [the applicant], the court finds it necessary to impose an administrative penalty in the form of a fine.”
The District Court imposed a fine in the amount of 500 Armenian drams (AMD) (approx. EUR 1 at the material time). The decision was final and not subject to appeal.
On 24 May 2002 the applicant lodged an appeal with the Civil Court of Appeal (ՀՀ քաղաքացիական գործերով վերաքննիչ դատարան). In his appeal the applicant argued that in accordance with the Constitution he had a right to contest the decision of the District Court before a higher court. He further argued that the interference with his right to freedom of assembly was not prescribed by law, as there did not exist any law which prescribed the rules that the applicant had allegedly violated. Furthermore, he expressly requested the Court of Appeal to name any such law if it existed.
On 14 June 2002 the Civil Court of Appeal examined the applicant's appeal and found that:
“On 14 May 2002 at around 15.00 o'clock [the applicant] participated in an authorised demonstration on the  in . Thereafter, at around 16:00 [the applicant] with a group of people participated in an unauthorised procession through the , during which he headed the procession [. For this reason] he was brought to the [police station].
The fact of the applicant heading an unauthorised procession is characterised as an offence envisaged under Article 180.1 of the Code of Administrative Offences, therefore, he must be subjected to administrative liability.”
On 24 June 2002 the applicant lodged a cassation appeal with the Court of Cassation (ՀՀ վճռաբեկ դատարան).
By a letter of 1 July 2002 the Court of Cassation informed the applicant that the domestic legislation did not provide for a right to lodge a cassation appeal against the decisions which the applicant sought to contest.
The relevant provision of the Code reads as follows:
Article 180.1
“Violation of the prescribed rules for organising or holding assemblies, rallies, street processions and demonstrations shall be punishable by imposition of a penalty in the amount of fifty to one hundred per cent of the fixed minimum wage, or, in exceptional cases where, in the circumstances of the case, taking into account the offenders personality, the application of these measures would be deemed insufficient, by imposition of administrative detention not exceeding fifteen days.”
This Decree defined the relevant rules, such as the requirement of prior authorisation, the authority deciding on requests for authorisation (i.e. the executive committee of the relevant local council of people's deputies), the procedure for making a request and its content, a decision to be taken following the examination of the request, a possibility to appeal this decision to a superior authority, requirements to be met when holding the mass event (e.g. that the event must take place at the time and place specified in the request, public order must be respected, no carrying of arms, etc.), reasons for refusal of an authorisation, and the grounds on which this or that particular event could be dispersed (e.g. absence of a request, refusal of an authorisation, violation of public order, etc.).
By adopting the Law, the Supreme Soviet of the  approved a number of decrees of the Chairmanship, including the above Decree of 28 July 1988 (see paragraph 21 above).
The relevant provisions of the Declaration read as follows:
“The Supreme Soviet of the Armenian [Soviet Socialist Republic] ... based on the principles enshrined in the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and the general norms of international law ... [and] aiming to achieve the establishment of a democratic society ruled by law;
Declares
The [Armenian Soviet Socialist Republic] is renamed as the ...
... Only the Constitution and laws of the Republic of Armenia are valid on the ... territory of the .”
The relevant provision of the Law reads as follows:
Article 16
“Until the adoption of a new constitution of the , the valid Constitution and laws are effective to the extent to which they do not contradict this Law and the legal acts adopted on the basis of the Declaration of Independence.”
The relevant Article of the Convention reads as follows:
Article 11
“From the moment of signing this Convention, norms of third states, including those of the former , shall not be applied on the territories of the signatory states.”
The relevant provisions of the Constitution read as follows:
Preamble
“The Armenian nation, taking as a basis the fundamental principles of the Armenian statehood enshrined in the Armenia's Declaration of Independence ... adopts the Constitution of the .”
Article 4
“The State guarantees the protection of human rights and freedoms on the basis of the Constitution and laws, and in accordance with the principles and norms of international law.”
Article 26
“Citizens have the right to hold peaceful assemblies, rallies, processions and demonstrations without carrying arms.”
Article 44
“No restrictions may be placed on the exercise of the rights and freedoms enshrined in Articles 23-27 of the Constitution other than such as are prescribed by law and are necessary in the interests of national security or public safety, for the protection of public order, health or morals, or for the protection of the rights, freedoms, honour and reputation of others.”
Article 116
“From the date of entry into force of this Constitution, (1) the Constitution of 1978 with subsequent amendments and supplements, and constitutional laws lose their force; (2) the laws and other legal acts of the  are effective to the extent to which they do not contradict this Constitution.”
The relevant provision of the Decree reads as follows:
Article 1.5
“The Mayor of Yerevan shall decide on the issue of holding assemblies, rallies, processions, demonstrations and other mass events in  in accordance with the rules prescribed by law.”
On 28 April 2004 the Armenian Parliament adopted a law regulating the procedure for holding assemblies, rallies, street processions and demonstrations. Article 16 of this law stated that, from the date of its entry into force, the Decree of the Chairmanship of the Supreme Soviet of the USSR on “Rules for Organising and Holding of Assemblies, Rallies, Street Processions and Demonstrations in the USSR” of 28 July 1988 was not to be applied on the territory of the .