The case concerns the question whether it was necessary in a democratic society for the Bulgarian courts to refuse to register an association which advocates the idea that there exists an oppressed Macedonian minority in Bulgaria and seeks to protect that alleged minority’s rights, on the grounds that (a) the association was directed against the unity of the Bulgarian nation, and that (b) its goals were political and therefore only capable of being pursued by a political party rather than a regular association.
The first applicant, the “Macedonian Club for Ethnic Tolerance in Bulgaria”, is an association set up in 2012 in Blagoevgrad, Bulgaria. The second applicant, Mr Angel Kirilov Radonov, is Bulgarian national who was born in 1954 and lives in Blagoevgrad; he is the chairman of the association’s board (see paragraph 4 below).
The applicants were represented before the Court by Mr T. Menkinoski, a lawyer practising in Skopje, North Macedonia. The Government were represented by their Agent, Mr V. Obretenov of the Ministry of Justice.
The facts of the case, as established by the Court, may be summarised as follows.
On 3 April 2012 the nine founders of the applicant association held a meeting at which they resolved to form the association, adopted its articles, and elected its board and chairman (the second applicant). They went on to instruct the second applicant to take the necessary steps to have the association registered.
On 13 June 2012 the association applied to the Blagoevgrad Regional Court to be registered. On 7 February 2013 the court refused its application (see реш. № 31 от 07.02.2013 г. по ф. д. № 36/2012 г., БОС).
The second applicant appealed. He argued, inter alia, that the refusal to register the association was in breach of Article 44 § 1 of the Constitution (see paragraph 14 below).
On 11 April 2013 the Sofia Court of Appeal upheld the lower court’s decision (see реш. № 715 от 11.04.2013 г. по ф. д. № 948/2013 г., САС). It noted that not-for-profit associations were chiefly characterised by their goals, which is why these goals had to be spelled out in their articles. In recognition of the fundamental right enshrined in Article 44 § 1 of the Constitution (see paragraph 14 below), which belonged to all people irrespective of their ethnic, confessional or linguistic differences, associations were by law entitled freely to set their goals. But as a corollary to that, the Constitution also envisaged, as was indeed permissible under international law, some universally applicable restrictions to freedom of association. A person’s self-identification as a member of an ethnic minority was thus neither a ground for privileges in that respect nor a ground for tougher restrictions.
The prohibition in Article 44 § 2 of the Constitution (see paragraph 14 below) was akin to that envisaged under Article 22 § 2 of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, and an organisation which proposed to protect the interests of an ethnic minority which had not historically come to exist in Bulgaria fell under the terms of that provision.
The court went on to note that in its articles the applicant association said that it would strive to protect the human and ethnic rights of Macedonians and other ethnic minorities in Bulgaria, and that it proposed to do so by organising lectures, talks and conferences about the past of the Macedonian people and its revolutionary struggles, as well as Macedonian national conventions and commemorations of historical dates and events; by collecting, publishing and preserving memoirs, documents and other materials relating to the fate of repressed Macedonians in Bulgaria; by providing legal and other assistance to repressed Macedonians and their heirs in Bulgaria; by organising rallies and demonstrations to vindicate the rights of the Macedonian minority in Bulgaria; and by presenting the problems of repressed Macedonians and of the Macedonian ethnic minority to the competent Bulgarian authorities and international institutions.
The systematic construction of those aims and means showed that they revealed assertions that there existed in Bulgaria a Macedonian ethnic minority whose rights had been infringed and would be protected by the applicant association. But there was no such minority in Bulgaria, in the form of a separate group established on its territory whose members were its nationals and had certain religious, linguistic, cultural or other characteristics that set them apart from the majority of the population. Therefore, the manifestation of such a minority by way of an association seeking to cater for its various needs was not in effect meant to defend its rights, which were no different from those of other citizens, but to cultivate among Bulgarian citizens a different ethnic self-consciousness which had not arisen in a natural historical way, and was thus directed against the unity of the nation, contrary to prohibition set out in Article 44 § 2 of the Constitution (see paragraph 14 below). Moreover, the association’s articles contained political goals, relating to activities characteristic of political parties, which was proscribed by Article 12 § 2 of the Constitution (see paragraph 11 below).
By Article 12 § 2 of the Constitution of 1991, associations may not pursue political goals or carry out political activities that are characteristic solely of political parties.
In a decision of 21 April 1992 (реш. № 4 от 21.04.1992 г. по к. д. № 1/1991 г., обн., ДВ, бр. 35/1992 г.) the Constitutional Court held, inter alia, that “political activities that are characteristic solely of political parties”, within the meaning of Article 12 § 2, were defined by Article 11 § 3 of the Constitution as those which facilitate “the formation of citizens’ political will” through “elections or other democratic means”. The court went on to say that “what was essential for this type of political activity [was] direct participation in the process of forming the bodies through which, under the Constitution, the people exercise[d] power”.
In January 2015 the plenary of the Supreme Court of Cassation’s Commercial Section asked the Constitutional Court to give a binding interpretation of Article 12 § 2. In a decision of 17 March 2015 (опр. № 1 от 17.03.2015 г. по к. д. № 1/2015 г., обн., ДВ, бр. 23/2015 г.), the Constitutional Court declined the request. It noted that it had not been shown that there existed divergences in the application of that provision, as required under its case-law, and that it was only competent to give a binding interpretation of a constitutional provision if it had been duly established that there was uncertainty about its meaning.
Article 44 § 1 of the Constitution enshrines the right to freedom of association. Article 44 § 2 goes on to say that organisations whose activities are directed against the country’s sovereignty or territorial integrity or against the nation’s unity, or which aim to stir up racial, national, ethnic or religious hatred, or to violate the rights and freedoms of others, as well as organisations creating secret or paramilitary structures, or which seek to attain their goals through violence, are prohibited.
The Not-For-Profit Legal Persons Act 2000 governs the formation, registration, organisation, activities and winding-up of not-for-profit legal persons, such as associations and foundations. Until the end of 2018, the registration procedure unfolded at first instance before the territorially competent regional courts. A September 2016 amendment to the 2000 Act – in particular to sections 17 and 18 –, which came into force on 1 January 2018, shifted competence to register associations from the regional courts to the Registry Agency attached to the Ministry of Justice (which has since 2008 also kept the register of companies). Since 1 January 2018 the registration procedure is governed by sections 13 to 31 of the Register of Companies and the Register of Not-For-Profit Legal Persons Act 2006 (as amended with effect from the same date).
The explanatory notes to the October 2015 Government bill which led to these amendments (no. 502-01-83) noted, among other things, that there existed systemic divergences in the case-law of the various regional courts relating to the registration of not-for-profit associations, which “gave rise to legal uncertainty, led to an increase in the administrative burden for organisations and in the time for obtaining registration, and was conducive to infringements of the constitutional right to freedom of association”.