On 5 December 2011 the applicants participated in a public assembly in Moscow to protest against the allegedly rigged elections that had taken place the previous day. After the demonstration they were arrested, detained and convicted of an administrative offence.
The applicants’ details are set out in the appended table.
The Russian Government (“the Government”) were represented by Mr G. Matyushkin, the former Representative of the Russian Federation to the European Court of Human Rights, and then by his successor in that office, Mr M. Galperin.
The facts of the case, as submitted by the parties, may be summarised as follows.
On 4 December 2011 general elections to the State Duma took place in Russia. On 5 December 2011 the applicants participated in a public event in Moscow, protesting against the elections, which they considered rigged. The authorities had been duly notified about the assembly. The circumstances relating to the same event have already been examined by the Court (see Navalnyy and Yashin v. Russia, no. 76204/11, §§ 6-11, 4 December 2014).
After the demonstration the applicants were arrested and transferred to various police stations in Moscow where the relevant administrative records were drawn up. The administrative offence records were based on the reports and explanations of the police officers who had arrested the applicants. The applicants were detained and spent up to three nights at the relevant police stations before being brought before the Justices of the Peace. The applicants submitted, inter alia, that they had had no place to sleep and access to toilets had been restricted during their detention. Some of them further submitted that during transport to the place of detention following their administrative conviction, they had been kept for several hours in an unheated bus.
On various dates all the applicants were convicted under Article 19.3 § 1 of the Code of Administrative Offences (refusal to obey the lawful order of a police officer) and sentenced to either administrative fines or administrative imprisonment (see the appended table). The domestic courts relied on the administrative offence records and the reports and explanations of the police officers. In particular, they considered unlawful that some of the applicants had shouted slogans and/or refused to stop participating in a public assembly (that followed the initial demonstration) in respect of which no advance notification had been submitted to the authorities.
For relevant domestic law applicable at the material time see Navalnyy and Yashin (cited above, §§ 4344).
Appendix