The case originated in an application (no. 4505/08) against the Russian Federation lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by six Russian nationals (see the appended table).
The applicants were represented by lawyers of the EHRAC/Memorial Human Rights Centre, NGOs with offices in Moscow and London. The Russian Government (“the Government”) were represented initially by Mr G. Matyushkin, Representative of the Russian Federation to the European Court of Human Rights, and then by his successor in that office, Mr M. Galperin.
On 12 March 2014 the Government were given notice of the application.
The Government did not object to the examination of the application by the Committee.
The applicants’ personal details appear in the appended table.
On 12 October 2006 Mr M., a leader of a human rights association “Mashr” based in Nazran, the Republic of Ingushetia, submitted a notification of the planned stationary demonstration (picket) to the authorities in accordance with the Law on Assemblies, Gatherings, Demonstrations and Pickets of 19 June 2004 (“the Public Assemblies Act”). The picket was to be held on 16 October 2006 from 4 p.m. to 6 p.m. near the monument to the heroes of the Second World War on Bazorkina Avenue. The purpose of the picket was to commemorate the journalist Anna Politkovskaya, who was murdered on 7 October 2006.
From 12 October 2006 Mashr began to circulate information on the planned picket to prospective participants, including the applicants.
On 15 October 2006 the director of Mashr received a handwritten letter from the Head of Nazran City Administration banning the planned picket on the grounds that Mashr, being a non-commercial organisation, had no right to organise it.
Considering the decision of the city administration to be in breach of the law, Mr M. went ahead with the organisation of the picket. He intended to challenge the decision later.
On 16 October 2006, before 4 p.m., the applicants arrived at the site of the picket. Some policemen and men in civilian clothes were present there. Mr M. and others had also gathered with the view to participating in the picket. The police and the men in civilian clothes allegedly insulted the picketers, including the applicants, and ordered them to disperse. When the applicants realised that it would be impossible for them to go ahead, they decided to leave.
The third, fourth and fifth applicants were apprehended on their way to the car, the sixth applicant was arrested at the site of the planned picket. At approximately 4 p.m. they were transferred to the Nazran police department. According to the applicants, they were driven to the police department in the cars that had no police markings, they were not promptly informed about the reasons for their arrest, and their lawyer was not allowed to see them when he arrived to the police department.
As submitted by the applicants, at midnight they were brought before the Justice of the Peace of the 8th Court Circuit of Nazran (“the Justice of the Peace”) who read out to them the records of their arrest drawn by the police officers. The reports stated that the applicants had taken part in the picket and had refused to obey the police order to leave the place of assembly, which constituted an administrative offence under Article 20.2 of the Code of Administrative Offences. The applicants contested the reports. The judge postponed the hearing to 17 October 2006.
They were released at 12.30 to 1.30 a.m. on 17 October 2006. The hearing was subsequently postponed to 31 October 2006.
On 31 October 2006 the Justice of the Peace discontinued the administrative proceedings against the four applicants concerned on the ground that no offence had taken place.
As submitted by the applicants, when leaving the site of the planned picket, the second applicant was attacked from behind by two men. During the fight that followed a man in civilian clothes, Mr T., hit the first applicant in her face. She started bleeding from the nose and the second applicant took her to the hospital.
The first applicant was diagnosed with an open nasal bone fracture, concussion and a closed craniocerebral trauma.
On 18 October 2006 the applicants complained to the Nazran Prosecutor’s Office about the above-mentioned events.
On 7 November 2006 the Nazran Prosecutor’s Office refused to institute a criminal investigation concerning the attack on the first applicant on the grounds that the injuries had been sustained two weeks prior to 16 October 2006.
On 23 November 2006 the Nazran Prosecutor’s Office reversed the decision of 7 November 2006 stating, in particular, that it did not contain an assessment of the behaviour of the police during the events. The investigator had not addressed the applicants’ allegations that the police officers were rude, unlawfully arrested and detained them for more than three hours.
On 27 December 2006 the Nazran Prosecutor’s Office refused to institute a criminal investigation into the actions of the police officers for a lack of corpus delicti. However, it stated that the first applicant’s injuries had been allegedly inflicted on 16 October 2006 by Mr T. and ordered the file in this part to be sent for a further review.
On 2 February 2007 an investigation officer instituted criminal proceedings in respect of Mr T. as regards the attack on the first applicant.
On 26 February 2007 the applicants challenged the decision of 27 December 2006 before the Nazran Town Court. They complained about the ban of the peaceful assembly and its dispersal, about their arrest and detention for more than three hours. They further submitted that the attacks on the first and the second applicant had taken place in the presence of some high-ranking police officers who tolerated the assaults.
On 24 April 2007 the Nazran Town Court dismissed the complaint on the ground that the first applicant had not been beaten by the police officers, but by a man in civilian clothes.
On 5 June 2007 the Supreme Court of Ingushetia dismissed applicants’ appeal. Neither the applicants nor their counsel was present at the hearing.
On 3 July 2007 the legal counsel received a copy of the decision of the Supreme Court of Ingushetia.
On 10 June 2007 the Justice of the Peace of the 9th Court Circuit of the Nasyr-Kortskiy District of Nazran found Mr T. guilty of the blows inflicted on the first applicant and ordered him to pay a fine of 30,000 Russian roubles (RUB). The judge examined a video recording which confirmed that Mr T. had punched the first applicant in the face. The description of the recording provided in the sentence further read that Mr T. had been prevented from hitting the first applicant for the second time by the policemen and the persons dressed in plain clothes present at the site.
The first applicant did not appeal against the sentence. Neither did she lodge any civil claims.
For a summary of the domestic provisions on the procedure for the notification of public events, on the liability for breaches committed in the course of public events, on the administrative transfer (escorting) and detention see Lashmankin and Others v. Russia (nos. 57818/09 and 14 others, §§ 216-312, 7 February 2017)