The applicant complained under Article 11 of the Convention that his right to freedom of assembly had been unjustifiably restricted.
The applicant was born in 1969 and lives in Tököl. He was represented by Mr T. Hüttl, a lawyer practising in Budapest and acting on behalf of the Hungarian Civil Liberties Union.
The Government were represented by their Agent, Mr Z. Tallódi, Ministry of Justice.
The facts of the case, as submitted by the parties, may be summarised as follows.
The applicant planned a demonstration in order to draw attention to the plight of borrowers of foreign-currency loans.
On 8 October 2013 he applied to the Budapest Police Department for acquiescence in a demonstration lasting from 17 October until 1 November 2013, scheduled to be held in District II of Budapest, in the neighbourhood of the embassy of Israel, and in District XII, in the neighbourhood of the permanent residence of the Prime Minister.
On 10 October 2013 the Budapest Police Department dismissed the application. It observed that on 2 October 2013, closure of the District XII venue had been ordered by the Counter-Terrorism Centre in view of the impending visit of the ambassador of Israel and other protected persons. The measure was in place from 3 October until 31 December 2013. The Police Department examined the application as covering a single demonstration to be held in two locations, which was why the District II location was not examined separately. In dismissing the applicant’s case, the Police Department drew his attention to a venue adjacent to the District XII location where an assembly would have been permissible.
The applicant sought judicial review.
On 14 October 2013 the Budapest Administrative and Labour Court reviewed the entire case.
The court noted that the locations selected by the applicant had no symbolic significance and were part of residential zones with narrow streets. A demonstration lasting for the period intended would potentially involve crowds – meaning that tents, food stands, loudspeakers and portable toilets would need to be set up – and generate much noise. This would create a situation capable of affecting the private life of residents and would result in their inevitable “entrapment”. At this juncture, the court noted the Constitutional Court’s case-law, according to which the presence of a “captive audience” was one aspect for consideration when assessing a restriction on freedom of assembly. In the case before it, the court found – while conceding that some limited inconvenience for others could be a permissible consequence of an assembly – that the narrow streets, the density of residential buildings and the absence of an “escape route” would expose the residents to a situation prejudicial to their right to respect for private life, for a considerable period of time (sixteen days).
The court further stated that the applicant’s case was to be tested in relation to the necessity and the proportionality of the restriction complained of. It observed that there were a number of competing rights at stake: the applicant’s right to freedom of assembly, on the one hand; and the rights of others to respect for their private life and free movement, and an official dignitary’s right to statutory protection, on the other. In the court’s view, the latter considerations outweighed the applicant’s interest in having the demonstration at the desired locations and the event therefore had to be prohibited.
The applicant lodged a constitutional complaint against the decision of the Budapest Administrative and Labour Court.
On 9 June 2015 the Constitutional Court declared the complaint admissible.
The Constitutional Court gave its decision (no. 354/2019 (XII.16.) AB) on 16 December 2019. It observed that the Budapest Administrative and Labour Court had construed the rights to respect for private life and free movement, as well as an official dignitary’s right to statutory protection, as grounds for restricting the right to freedom of assembly. For the Constitutional Court, that reasoning amounted to an unlawful broadening of the scope of exhaustive reasons for the prohibition of a demonstration as contemplated in section 8(1) of the Assembly Act (see paragraph 15 below). However, because new regulations had meanwhile been enacted extending the scope of potential reasons in question, the Constitutional Court was satisfied that the applicant’s complaint had no further purpose and discontinued the case.
Section 8 of the Assembly Act (Act no. III of 1989) provides as follows:
“(1)  If the holding of an event subject to prior notification seriously endangers the proper functioning of the representative bodies or courts, or the circulation of traffic cannot be secured by another route, the police may ban the holding of the event at the place or time indicated in the notification, within forty-eight hours of receipt of the notification by the authority.
(2)  The decision of the police shall be communicated to the organiser in writing within 24 hours.”