The case originated in an application (no. 7602/06) against the Russian Federation lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) on 17 February 2006 by the Conservative Party of Russia (Konservativnaya partiya Rossii) registered on 25 December 2001 in Moscow (“the applicant party”) and two Russian nationals, Mr Yuriy Sergeyevich Denisov (the second applicant) and Mr Andrey Aleksandrovich Oborin (the third applicant), who were born in 1951 and 1952 respectively. The applicant party is represented before the Court by Ms N. Korolyova, the acting chairman. The second and third applicants are represented before the Court by Mr V. Shumskoy, a lawyer practising in Moscow.
The Russian Government (“the Government”) were represented initially by Ms V. Milinchuk, the Representative of the Russian Federation to the European Court of Human Rights, and then by her successor in that office, Mr M. Galperin.
The applicants alleged, in particular, that the dissolution of the Conservative Party of Russia constituted a breach of Article 11 of the Convention.
On 9 May 2007 the Government were given notice of the application. The Government objected to the examination of the application by a Committee. Having considered the Government’s objection, the Court rejects it.
The second and third applicants are members of the Secretariat of the applicant party. They live in Moscow.
On 15 January 1992 the Ministry of Justice formally registered the public association “Conservative Party of Russia”. The declared aims of the association were “a democratic transformation of the country” and “building of a democratic society based on the principles of pluralism, real sovereignty of the people and guaranteed individual rights”.
On 30 September 2001 a general conference of the public association decided on its re-organisation into a political party by the same name.
On 25 December 2001 the applicant party was registered by the Ministry of Justice.
Following establishment of the Unified State Register of Legal Entities, on 15 January 2003 the information on the applicant party was entered into the Register.
In June 2004, the Ministry of Justice applied to the Basmanniy District Court of Moscow seeking dissolution of the applicant party in connection with gross and irreparable breaches of the Russian law. It relied in this regard on Article 61 § 2 of the Civil Code, section 25 § 3 of the Political Parties Act and section 25 § 2 of the Legal Entities Registration Act. The Ministry of Justice submitted that in 2001 the applicant party had submitted for registration fifty-three minutes of regional conferences concerning re-organisation of the public association into the political party. Of those, twenty-five documents contained untrue information, in particular:
“–  on the date of the conference concerning the re-organisation (Krasnodar, Belgorod, Voronezh, Ivanovo, Nizhny Novgorod,  and Yaroslavl Regions);
–  on the election of managers of regional branches (Belgorod, Voronezh, Ivanovo, Lipetsk, Nizhny Novgorod,  and Chelyabinsk Regions);
–  on the membership and election of individuals to the standing management body of the regional branch (Krasnodar, Belgorod, Voronezh, Ivanovo, Kostroma, Kirov, Lipetsk, Nizhny Novgorod,  and Chelyabinsk Regions);
–  on the membership and election of individuals to the audit commission (Krasnodar, Belgorod, Voronezh, Ivanovo, Nizhny Novgorod,  and Chelyabinsk Regions);
–  on the address (location) of the management body of the regional branch (Bashkortostan, Kabardino-Balkaria, Karachayevo-Cherkessiya, Tatarstan and Komi Republics, Arkhangelsk, Belgorod, Vologda, Voronezh, Ivanovo, Irkutsk, Kaluga, Kemerovo, Kostroma, Kirov, Kurgan, Leningrad, Nizhny Novgorod, Oryol, Penza, Sverdlovsk, Tver and Tula Regions, Moscow and St Petersburg);
–  on the number of members of regional branches (Kirov, Nizhny Novgorod and Ulyanovsk Regions);
–  on the number of persons who attended the conference (Krasnodar, Belgorod, Voronezh, Ivanovo, Kirov,  and Yaroslavl Regions).”
The Ministry of Justice further submitted that three regional branches (in the Kemerovo and Leningrad Regions and in St Petersburg) had been dissolved by a judicial decision because of gross violations of legal requirements on the number of members and the procedure for election of the management body. Finally, the Ministry of Justice claimed that the applicant party had breached section 25 § 3 of the Political Parties Act in that the management bodies and audit commission had not been elected by secret ballot.
The applicant party objected to the Ministry’s claims. It argued that neither the regional justice departments nor the Ministry of Justice itself had uncovered any defects in the documents when taking the decision to register the party in 2001. In 2004 the Ministry had carried out an inspection of all regional branches of the party and found no major irregularities. The allegation that the elections had not been by secret ballot was unsubstantiated because the documents reflected the outcome, but not the procedure, of the election.
On 15 April 2005 the Basmanniy District Court of Moscow granted the Ministry’s application. It recalled that section 25 § 3 of the Political Parties Act required a political party to have no fewer than ten thousand members in at least one half of Russian regions (that is, forty-five regions). The applicant party had submitted for registration minutes of reorganisation of fifty-three regional branches having a total membership of 10,686 persons. The District Court observed that an inspection by the Ministry had revealed that twenty-five minutes of regional conferences had contained untrue information as per the above-cited list (see paragraph 10 above). The District Court further noted that regional branches in the Kemerovo and Leningrad Regions and in St Petersburg had been dissolved by a judicial decision on account of gross violations of legal requirements of minimum membership and the procedure for election of management bodies. On the basis of those elements, the District Court reached the conclusion that the applicant party had submitted untrue information to the registration body and that at the date of its registration it had not had properly established regional branches in one half of Russian regions or a ten-thousand-strong membership. Thus, the applicant party did not meet the requirements for a political party within the meaning of section 3 § 2 of the Political Parties Act.
Furthermore, the District Court considered it established that the applicant party’s management and audit bodies had not been elected by secret ballot, in breach of section 25 § 2 of the Political Parties Act. In the District Court’s view, that omission amounted to a gross and irreparable violation of the law, because it put into doubt the legality of the management’s decisions.
The District Court further stated that section 38 of the Political Parties Act did not limit the scope of the competent authorities’ monitoring of the political parties’ compliance with the law to their compliance with the provisions of the said Act. The Ministry of Justice was right to apply for the applicant party’s dissolution with a reference to the Legal Entities Registration Act on the ground of the breaches committed at the moment of the party’s registration. The court ordered that the applicant party be dissolved because of gross and irreversible violations of the law committed at the time of its registration.
On 18 August 2005 the Moscow City Court, in a summary fashion, upheld the judgment of the Basmanniy District Court. It rejected the applicant party’s arguments in the following terms:
“The arguments to the effect that the justice departments have previously carried out inspections of compliance by the Conservative Party of Russia with the legislation and have not uncovered any violations, do not undermine the District Court’s finding that violations were committed at the time of registration. Materials in the case-file prove the existence of such violations.
The fact that the registration authority had no comments on the documents submitted for registration at the time of registration only indicates that these violations had not been revealed at that stage. It does not prevent the registration body from applying to a court with an application for dissolution of a legal entity if it discovered such violations at a later stage...
The appeal court does not agree with the argument that the violations could [still] be remedied. The legal requirements concerning the minimum number of regional branches and party members should have been fulfilled [already] at the moment of registration of the political party.
The arguments that the violations, which the [Ministry of Justice] referred to, were not proven are similar to the arguments reviewed by the first-instance court. These arguments are unsubstantiated and find no basis in the case materials.”
A political party must have regional branches in more than one half of Russian regions. It must have no fewer than ten thousand members provided that each regional branch has no fewer than one hundred members (section 3 § 2).
Branches of political parties operate on a territorial basis. Branches of political parties may not be created in agencies of State authority and of local self-government, in the military forces, law enforcement and other State agencies as well as in State or non-State organisations (section 9 § 4). Political parties and their branches may not operate in agencies of State authority and of local self-government (except for legislative (representative) State and municipal bodies), in the military forces, law enforcement and other State agencies, in the secretariat of legislative (representative) State bodies and in State organisations. Political parties may not interfere with educational process within educational facilities (section 9 § 5).
The management bodies and audit commission of a political party must be elected by secret ballot (section 25 § 3).
A political party is the only type of a public association that has the right to propose candidates to be elected as members of the parliament or other elected representatives in State bodies (section 36 § 1).
The competent authorities monitor compliance of political parties and their regional and other structural branches with Russian laws, as well as the compatibility of political parties’ activities with the regulations, aims and purposes set out in their articles of association. The authorities have the right to apply to a court for the suspension of the activities or the dissolution of a political party or its regional branch (section 38 § 1).
A political party may be dissolved by a decision of either its highest management body or the Supreme Court (section 41 § 1).
A political party may be dissolved by a decision of the Supreme Court in case of its failure:
-  to comply with the requirements of section 9 §§ 4 and 5 of the Political Parties Act (section 41 § 3 (a));
-  to rectify within the established time-limit the violations that constituted the ground for the suspension of its activity (section 41 § 3 (b));
-   to take part in elections (section 41 § 3 (c));
-  to have regional branches of at least 5000 members in more than half of Russian regions (section 41 § 3 (d))
-  to meet the minimum membership requirement provided in section 3 § 2 (section 41 § 3 (e));
-  to provide the competent authorities with information necessary for updating data in the Register of Legal Entities (section 41 § 3 (f)).
The registration body may apply to a court with an application for dissolution of a legal entity if that entity has been registered with gross breaches of the law or other regulations, provided that such breaches are of irreparable nature, and also in the case of numerous serious breaches of laws or other normative acts on State registration of legal entities (section 25 § 2).
A legal entity may be dissolved by a court decision in case it was created with irreparable breaches of the law (Article 61 § 2 (2), as in force at the material time).
The Supreme Court of Russia acts as a first instance court in respect of cases concerning suspension of activity or dissolution of political parties (Article 27 § 1 (4)).
In its Ruling no. GKPI2005-40 of 19 January 2005 the Supreme Court held that only applications for dissolution of a political party on the grounds provided in section 41 § 3 of the Political Parties Act fell within its jurisdiction under Article 27 § 1 (4) of the Code of Civil Procedure. However, applications for dissolution of a political party on the grounds provided in section 25 § 2 of the Legal Entities Registration Act were to be submitted to a district court according to jurisdictional rules.